<!-- Page 1 -->


View
Online 
Export
Citation
RESEARCH ARTICLE |  MAY 01 2004
Electron acceleration in the dynamic magnetotail: Test
particle orbits in three-dimensional magnetohydrodynamic
simulation fields 
J. Birn; M. F. Thomsen; M. Hesse
Phys. Plasmas 11, 1825–1833 (2004)
https://doi.org/10.1063/1.1704641
Articles You May Be Interested In
Particle acceleration in the dynamic magnetotail
Phys. Plasmas (May 2000)
Magnetic reconnection in Earth's magnetotail: Energy conversion and its earthward–tailward asymmetry
Phys. Plasmas (January 2018)
Evolution of flux ropes in the magnetotail: A three-dimensional global hybrid simulation
Phys. Plasmas (May 2015)
 19 March 2026 21:02:29


---

<!-- Page 2 -->

Electron acceleration in the dynamic magnetotail: Test particle orbits
in three-dimensional magnetohydrodynamic simulation ﬁelds
J. Birn and M. F. Thomsena)
Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, New Mexico
M. Hesse
NASA/Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland
~Received 23 October 2003; accepted 12 February 2004; published online 13 April 2004!
Electron acceleration and energetic electron ﬂux increases in the inner tail are investigated on the
basis of test-particle orbits in the dynamic ﬁelds of a three-dimensional magnetohydrodynamic
simulation of neutral line formation and dipolarization in the magnetotail. Past models have mostly
considered equatorial orbits, using the gyrocenter drift approximation. In this paper, the
investigation is extended to include nonequatorial drifts and full orbit integrations in regions where
the drift approximation breaks down. Typical acceleration mechanisms consist of betatron
acceleration at large pitch angles and Fermi acceleration at small pitch angles, resulting from the
dipolarization and shortening of ﬁeld lines moving earthward from the neutral line. In comparison,
acceleration at the near-Earth neutral line plays a negligible role in ﬂux increases observed in the
near tail. Energetic electron ﬂuxes appear preferentially enhanced around 90° pitch angle, so that
restriction to those pitch angles might lead to an overestimate of ﬂux increases. Otherwise, the
results explain the observed limitation of the range of ﬂux enhancements between a few keV and a
few hundred keV.
© 2004 American Institute of Physics. @DOI: 10.1063/1.1704641#
I. INTRODUCTION
The acceleration of charged particles to high energies is
an important part of activity in magnetospheric, solar, and
astrophysical plasmas. Energetic particle injections into the
near-Earth magnetosphere, that is, the sudden increase of
charged particle ﬂuxes at energies from tens to hundreds of
keV, are a characteristic feature of the onset of the expansive
phase of magnetospheric substorms @e.g., Refs. 1–3#. The
particle injections are associated with a rapid reorganization
of the inner magnetotail, described as dipolarization or col-
lapse of a stretched tail-like ﬁeld @e.g., Refs. 1, 4, 5# and a
strong induced electric ﬁeld predominantly in the dawn-to-
dusk ~y! direction @e.g., Ref. 6#, which is localized in space
as well as time. The acceleration affects both ions and elec-
trons, but the observed signatures show local time depen-
dence resulting from particle drifts @e.g., Ref. 7#. Surveys of
dispersionless injections8,9 demonstrated that even the re-
gions of dispersionless injections are not identical for elec-
trons and ions, but most likely displaced in the east–west
direction.
While modeling of the effects of wave–particle interac-
tions requires the use of kinetic models, the acceleration
from large-scale electric ﬁelds can be investigated through
test particle simulations in appropriate ﬁelds @e.g., Refs. 10–
15#. The observed energetic ion behavior was indeed suc-
cessfully reproduced in simulations that were based on test
particle orbits in the dynamic ﬁelds from an magnetohydro-
dynamic ~MHD! simulation of tail reconnection, plasmoid
ejection, and collapse of the inner tail.16 Similarly, electron
acceleration and ﬂux changes were also investigated by test
particle orbits in the same dynamic MHD simulation ﬁelds.17
These simulations, although restricted to adiabatic orbits in
the equatorial plane, using the gyrocenter drift approxima-
tion, also reproduced characteristic observed energetic elec-
tron signatures and speciﬁcally, showed the east–west dis-
placement of energetic ion and electron ﬂux signatures and
the limited energy range of ﬂux increases. Observed tempo-
ral ﬂux variations of energetic electrons have also been re-
produced by Ref. 15, using numerical integration, and Ref.
18, using an analytic model, based on particle orbits in as-
sumed ﬁelds modeling dipolarization of the inner tail. The
two models, however, differed in the source regions for the
accelerated particles.
The crucial role in generating energetic particle charac-
teristics is played by the cross-tail electric ﬁeld, induced by
the dynamic changes of the tail magnetic geometry. The most
important factors are that the electric ﬁeld is localized in all
three space dimensions, propagates earthward, and peaks
near the tail/dipole transition region, rather than near the x
line where reconnection takes place. In MHD simulations
this property follows self-consistently from the evolution of
the tail after the initiation of reconnection. Although the role
of the large-scale electric ﬁeld in the acceleration seems well
established, it is not clear whether the properties of the par-
ticle velocity distributions, such as changes in isotropy, are
the effects of the large-scale ﬁelds or whether additional
smaller-scale ﬂuctuations are crucial. As demonstrated by
observations at geosynchronous orbit, preexisting perpen-
dicular anisotropies (T'.Ti) of thermal ions and electrons
typically decrease during the substorm growth phase and in-
crease again after onset,8 while energetic electron distribu-
a!Electronic mail: jbirn@lanl.gov
PHYSICS OF PLASMAS
VOLUME 11, NUMBER 5
MAY 2004
1825
1070-664X/2004/11(5)/1825/9/$22.00
© 2004 American Institute of Physics
 19 March 2026 21:02:29


---

<!-- Page 3 -->

tions become more ﬁeld aligned during the growth phase and
less ﬁeld aligned after onset. The study of such effects obvi-
ously requires consideration of arbitrary pitch angles and
nonequatorial orbits. This is also necessary in order to esti-
mate pitch-angle-integrated ﬂuxes, which may differ from
strictly equatorial ﬂuxes.
Most of the earlier investigations of electron injections
have been based on adiabatic drift orbits, using the conser-
vation of the magnetic moment @e.g., Refs. 15, 18#. This
approximation is usually well satisﬁed for electrons in the
vicinity of geosynchronous orbit, where most of the injection
observations have been made. However, encounters of the
neutral sheet under sufﬁciently weak ﬁelds do not satisfy the
drift approximation. Such encounters act like a pitch-angle
scattering process @e.g., Ref. 19#, such that orbits that are
initially close to the equatorial plane need not stay close to
that plane, or vice versa. Furthermore, substorm simulations
indicate that the collapse of the inner tail is the consequence
of magnetic reconnection farther downtail @e.g., Ref. 20#,
presumably at a distance around 20 to 30 RE . Reconnection
shortens magnetic ﬁeld lines, reduces the speciﬁc entropy,
and thus enables the transport into the inner tail @e.g., Ref.
21–23#. Collapsing ﬁeld lines, identiﬁed by reduced entropy
content, hence typically have previously undergone recon-
nection. Energetic electrons up to energies of tens or hun-
dreds of keV typically also follow this ﬁeld line history. That
means that prior to the collapse, these electrons typically
have passed the vicinity of the reconnection site, where the
drift assumption breaks down. This becomes important when
the effects of the collapse are to be compared with the direct
acceleration in the vicinity of the neutral line, for the identi-
ﬁcation of the source regions, and for a quantitative estima-
tion of ﬂuxes when the injected particles have to be traced
back to the source conﬁguration prior to the initiation of the
dynamic phase. Therefore, a full investigation of the history
of accelerated electrons in the dynamic reconnecting tail has
to take into account that during parts of that history the adia-
batic drift assumption may not be valid, so that full orbit
integrations have to be made.
As in our previous test particle investigations,16,17 we
use the electric and magnetic ﬁelds obtained from an MHD
simulation.20 This simulation includes both features consid-
ered as potentially relevant for particle acceleration: a neutral
line region associated with the reconnection process and the
ﬁeld collapse or dipolarization of the inner tail ~which is
similar to the ‘‘convection surge mechanism’’24,25!. This has
already permitted a comparison of the relative importance of
these features for ion acceleration. While both mechanisms
were found to contribute to ion acceleration and enhance-
ment of ﬂuxes, the electric ﬁeld associated with the collapse
was most signiﬁcant for the initial ﬂux increase of an injec-
tion and hence the inner ~earthward! edge of the region of
enhanced ion ﬂuxes ~injection boundary!. Here, we extend
this work to consider electron acceleration.
In Sec. II we will discuss the equations of motion. Full
orbit integration of the electron motion is time consuming
and unnecessary in regions where electrons are adiabatic,
and may actually lead to unwanted large accumulated errors.
We therefore switch from full orbits to drift orbits, and vice
versa, when the drift approximation becomes valid or in-
valid. In Sec. III we will describe characteristics of the simu-
lation ﬁelds and illustrate typical orbits and acceleration
mechanisms. Section IV then will be devoted to phase-space
variations of the simulated electron ﬂuxes.
II. BASIC APPROACH
The electron energies of interest approach or may even
exceed the rest energy. We therefore use relativistic equa-
tions of motion. The full motion of an electron with rest mass
me and charge 2e is described by
Du
Dt 52
e
meS E1
1
g uÃBD ,
~1!
where
D
Dt [
]
]t 1w•¹.
~2!
Here, we have set u5gw, where w is the electron velocity,
and
g5
1
A12w2/c2 5A11u2/c2,
~3!
is the relativistic factor. The kinetic energy of the electron is
then given by
Wkin5~g21!mec2.
~4!
The drift of an electron with rest mass me ~relativistic!
magnetic moment mr , and charge q52e is given by @e.g.,
Ref. 26#
vd5vE2
mr
ge
B3¹B
B2
2
megvi
e
B
B2 3
db
dt 2
me
e
B
B2
3
dgvE
dt
,
~5!
where b[B/B
vE5
EÃB
B2 ,
~6!
and
d
dt [
]
]t 1~vi1vd!•¹,
~7!
is the time derivative along the drift orbit. The relativistic
magnetic moment mr is deﬁned by
mr5
p'
2
2meB ,
~8!
where p'5megw'5meu' is the perpendicular relativistic
momentum associated with the gyration speed w' . The ki-
netic energy is then given by ~4! with
g5A11~ui
212mrB/me1uE
2 !/c2,
~9!
where ui5gvi and uE5gvE . We note that we do not distin-
guish between the parallel speed of the particle and that of
1826
Phys. Plasmas, Vol. 11, No. 5, May 2004
Birn, Thomsen, and Hesse
 19 March 2026 21:02:29


---

<!-- Page 4 -->

the gyrocenter. The drift contributions are neglected in the
energy expression ~9! because these contributions are even
smaller than the EÃB drift contribution in comparison to
those of the gyromotion and the parallel motion.
Concerning the equation of motion for the parallel com-
ponent of the velocity, it turns out that the expression given,
for instance, in Ref. 26 has to be modiﬁed to ensure exact
energy conservation for stationary ﬁelds. The additional
terms are only of order e2, where e is the smallness param-
eter of the adiabatic expansion ~say, the ratio of a gyroperiod
over a macroscopic time scale!. Nevertheless, this correction
becomes relevant when drift orbits are followed over times
corresponding to many gyrations. The corrected equation of
motion can be derived from a Hamiltonian approach.27 It is
given by
dui
dt 52
e
me
Ei2
mr
gme
]B
]s 1~uE1u¹B!•
db
dt .
~10!
Here, u¹B5gv¹B , and v¹B is the gradient B drift given by
the second term on the right-hand side of ~5!.
To estimate the relative order of magnitude of the terms
in ~5! and ~10!, we normalize them using characteristic quan-
tities Bc , tc , and vc as deﬁned in the MHD run. Here, Bc
580 nT is the lobe ﬁeld strength at the inner boundary of the
simulation box, tc56 s is a characteristic Alve´n wave travel
time across the plasma sheet with a half thickness of Lc
51 RE at the inner boundary, and vc5Lc /tc'1000 km/s is a
typical Alfve´n speed. The corresponding electric ﬁeld unit is
Ec5Bcvc . We normalize the magnetic moment of the elec-
tron using the same energy unit as in our previous study17
and in the study of proton orbits,16 because we are interested
in similar energies
Wc5
mp
2 vc
2'5 keV,
~11!
such that mc5Wc /Bc . Typical dimensionless values of the
energies and magnetic moments of energetic particles are in
the range 10–100 ~corresponding to 50–500 keV!.
Equation ~5! then can be written in dimensionless form
~using the symbol ˆ to denote dimensionless quantitites!
vˆd5vˆE2
emˆ
2g
Bˆ 3¹Bˆ
Bˆ 2
2esuˆ i
Bˆ
Bˆ 2 3
db
dtˆ 2es2 Bˆ
Bˆ 2 3
duˆ E
dtˆ ,
~12!
where uˆ i5ui /vce
vce5vcAmp /me,
~13!
s5Ame /mp51/42.85, and e represents the ratio between
the proton gyroperiod ~divided by 2p! and the characteristic
Alfve´n time tc , given by
e51/~vctc!5mp /~eBctc!.
~14!
For typical tail parameters, e'1/50.
The last term in ~12!, representing electron inertia ef-
fects, is typically much smaller than the preceding gradient
drift term, as indicated by the additional factor s. This term
is therefore neglected. The electron drift equations used here
hence are given by
vˆd5vˆE2
emˆ
2g
Bˆ 3¹Bˆ
Bˆ 2
2esuˆ i
2 Bˆ
Bˆ 2 3
]b
]sˆ ,
~15!
duˆ i
dtˆ 52
1
es Eˆ
i2
mˆ
2sg
]Bˆ
]sˆ 1
uˆ i
g ~uˆ E1uˆ ¹B!•
]b
]sˆ ,
~16!
where vˆ¹B5v¹B /vc and only the leading term of db/dt is
retained.
The ~normalized! kinetic energy of an electron in the
drift approximation is given by
Wˆ 52~g21!c2/vce
2 ,
~17!
where
g5A11~vce
2 /c2!~uˆ i
21mˆ Bˆ 1s2uˆ E
2 !.
~18!
The factor s2 in the last term in ~18! stems from the fact that
the parallel velocity, as well as the gyration speed are nor-
malized by vce , while the EÃB drift velocity is normalized
by vc . Clearly, the ﬁrst terms in ~18! dominate for kinetic
energies larger than aproximately 1 keV, as considered here.
The EÃB drift term will therefore also be neglected in ~18!.
This neglect is consistent with the neglect of the inertia term
in ~15!.
The drift approximation breaks down when the gyrope-
riod becomes comparable to the characteristic time for the
ﬁeld evolution, tc , or when the gyroradius becomes compa-
rable to the characteristic length scale of the underlying elec-
tric and magnetic ﬁeld. The ﬁrst condition leads to a limit for
the magnetic ﬁeld strength, which can be written in dimen-
sionless form as
Bˆ cr15l1es2'l11025,
~19!
where l1 is a numerical factor large compared to unity, say,
l1'100. The drift approximation thus breaks down when
the magnetic ﬁeld strength becomes smaller than Bˆ cr1
'1023.
In the evaluation of the second condition, we ﬁnd that
typically the shortest characteristic length scale near the
equatorial plane is the magnetic ﬁeld curvature radius rc . A
conservative estimate therefore is that the drift approxima-
tion is valid when
a,rc /l2 ,
~20!
where a is the local gyroradius and l2 is a number of order
10 or larger. At the equatorial plane, the curvature radius is
approximately given by rc5(Bz /Bc)Lc , where Bc and Lc
are the characteristic lobe ﬁeld and plasma sheet half-
thickness deﬁned earlier, respectively, and the gyroradius by
a5mev' /(eBz), where v' is the gyration velocity. In di-
mensionless form, this leads to a second condition for the
magnetic ﬁeld, given by
Bˆ 2.Bˆ
cr2
2 5l2esu'5uˆ' /ucr ,
~21!
where u'5gv' and we have replaced Bz with B to apply
this criterion to arbitrary locations. After some numerical ex-
periments we chose ucr51/(l2es)5100.
The condition ~21! is usually much more stringent than
that given by threshold ~19!, except at very low energies. The
1827
Phys. Plasmas, Vol. 11, No. 5, May 2004
Electron acceleration in the dynamic magnetotail . . .
 19 March 2026 21:02:29


---

<!-- Page 5 -->

threshold value Bcr for transition to a full orbit is also higher
than the one used by Ref. 17, due to the fact that the orbits in
that paper were conﬁned to 90° pitch angle in the equatorial
plane such that the curvature drift vanishes. The gradient B
drift is typically much smaller in the stretched tail, extending
the limit for the validity of the drift approximation to lower B
values.
For B,Bcr the full orbits are integrated. Using the same
normalization as before, the full equations of motion are
given by
Drˆ
Dtˆ 5
1
s uˆ,
~22!
Duˆ
Dtˆ 5
1
es2 ~sEˆ 1guˆÃBˆ !,
~23!
where uˆ5gw/vce. Note that the vectors r and w now denote
the particle location and velocity, respectively, and that E
and B are evaluated at this location. Also, D/Dt denotes the
derivative along the full orbit, given by ~2!, rather than along
the drift orbit. The condition Bˆ ,Bˆ cr , where Bcr is the maxi-
mum of the values given by ~19! and ~21!, is used to switch
from drift orbit integration to full orbit integration. To avoid
a too-frequent shifting when Bˆ oscillates around the critical
value, we increased the critical value for upward shifting
~from full orbit to drift! by a factor of 1.5.
When switching from a full orbit to the drift approxima-
tion, the phase information is lost. At the switch from drift to
full orbit we therefore imposed a random phase. Although
the choice of this phase may strongly affect an individual
orbit, we found that it had no signiﬁcant effect on the overall
characteristics, such as the times and locations where accel-
erated particles are found. Similarly, the exact numerical
value for the critical magnetic ﬁeld strength Bˆ cr for the orbit
shift, which also inﬂuences the phase, may signiﬁcantly alter
an individual orbit but has no strong effect on the overall
characteristics. This will be discussed in the following sec-
tion.
III. BACKGROUND FIELDS AND CHARACTERISTIC
ORBITS
The underlying MHD simulation20 is the same as in pre-
vious test particle investigations,16,17 modeling the dynamics
of a tail section 265 RE<x<25 RE , uyu<10 RE , uzu
<10 RE , with a dipole located outside the simulation box at
x50 and assuming symmetry around y50 and z50. The
simulation of the dynamic breakup phase is preceded by a
simulated growth phase, during which an external electric
ﬁeld is applied at the high-latitude boundary of the simula-
tion box. This leads to the formation of a thin current sheet in
the near tail, characteristic for the late growth phase and
presumably crucial for the initiation of the breakup phase.
The breakup of this current sheet is initiated by imposing
ﬁnite resistivity, deﬁning the initial time t50. A magnetic
neutral line forms ;2 min after imposing the resistivity. Im-
portant features are illustrated in Fig. 1, which shows the
color-coded magnetic ﬁeld Bz in the equatorial plane for t
56–9 min. The red contour represents the neutral line Bz
50, and black lines are contours of constant positive Ey ,
spaced at intervals of 4 mV/m. Figure 1 shows the strong
localization of the dipolarization and of the enhanced Ey
with a peak located well earthward of the neutral line. This is
the region that most strongly affects the orbits and the par-
ticle acceleration.
Since the MHD results are given on a ﬁnite grid that is
coarser than the orbit integration steps, interpolation of the
MHD ﬁelds in space and time is necessary. The electric and
magnetic ﬁelds were interpolated linearly in time. Consis-
tency between the magnetic ﬁeld gradients in ~15! and ~16!
and the interpolated ﬁelds and continuity at the boundaries of
the grid boxes requires that the magnetic ﬁeld be interpolated
by third-order polynomials in the space coordinates. Since
this can introduce spurious nonmonotonic variations of the
interpolated variables when the ﬁelds vary rapidly in space, a
monotonicity-preserving algorithm was used to constrain the
derivatives of B.28 The electric ﬁeld was interpolated linearly
in space.
As in our previous test particle simulations, we inte-
grated the particle orbits backwards in time until they
reached the boundary of the simulation box or the initial
state. This enables us to impose initial and boundary distri-
butions, consistent with the MHD moments, and to infer the
distribution function at the later time via Liouville’s theorem
of the conservation of the phase-space density f along the
particle trajectory. While this procedure works very well
when the phase-space mapping between the initial and ﬁnal
locations is a smooth function of the phase coordinates,29
chaotic effects may dominate in parts or all of phase space.
That means that a slight variation in the ﬁnal location or
speed can lead to vastly different initial locations or speeds,
and vice versa. Similar effects may arise from the choice of
the random phase at transitions from a drift orbit to a full
orbit. In this case the mapped value of the distribution func-
tion can ﬂuctuate signiﬁcantly in a small neighborhood of the
chosen phase-space location. The actual value to be com-
pared with observations then has to be an average of f over
such a neighborhood, using a sufﬁcient number of phase-
space trajectories.
A. Effect of the threshold for orbit transitions
Typical effects of orbit transitions and the role of the
critical threshold ~21! are illustrated by Fig. 2, which shows
the equatorial crossing points of orbits traced backwards in
time from t58 min at x5210, y5z50 with a ﬁnal pitch
angle of 85° and an energy of 180 keV. Since the ﬁnal part of
the orbit satisﬁed our drift criterion, no phase speciﬁcation
was necessary. The orbits are superposed on contours of con-
stant cross-tail electric ﬁeld, as shown in Fig. 1, taken at t
57 min. Orbit ~a! ~red curve! corresponds to the choice ucr
5100 in ~21!, while orbits ~b! and ~c! ~green and blue
curves, respectively! correspond to ucr5200, but with
slightly different pitch angles. The dots mark the transition
from full orbits to drift orbits, or vice versa in each case. All
curves show qualitatively similar histories, consisting ~for-
ward in time! of a drift from the boundary y510 towards the
center, a somewhat erratic portion near y52, where the par-
ticles encounter the strong spatial and temporal gradients of
1828
Phys. Plasmas, Vol. 11, No. 5, May 2004
Birn, Thomsen, and Hesse
 19 March 2026 21:02:29


---

<!-- Page 6 -->

the electric and magnetic ﬁeld, and a ﬁnal earthward drift
towards the chosen end location. The late history (210>x
>213) of orbits ~a!, ~b!, and ~c! is very similar, despite the
fact that most of this section is calculated using the drift
approximation for orbits ~b! and ~c!, while full orbits are
calculated during the neutral sheet crossings for orbit ~a!.
The orbits begin ~backwards in time! to deviate from each
other near the location x5213.5, y52. This is an effect of a
sensitivity to small differences in the phase-space locations,
rather than a sensitivity to the value of ucr . To demonstrate
this, we included orbit ~c! in Fig. 2 ~blue curve!, which cor-
responds to the same value ucr5200 as orbit ~b! but a
slightly different ﬁnal pitch angle ~a585.0001°!. This orbit
begins to deviate from the others near the same location,
eventually following an early history (y.2) closer to orbit
~a! than orbit ~b!. The energy gain for cases ~a!–~c! was
124.8, 125.7, and 140.9 keV, respectively. In this case, the
change in the value of ucr has ~accidentally! less effect on
the energy gain than the change in the ﬁnal pitch angle.
In summary, the effects of changing the threshold value
Bcr are comparable to the effects of small changes in the
phase-space coordinates. Orbits that are sensitive to such
changes are also sensitive to the changes of Bcr , while orbits
that are insensitive to small variations of the initial or ﬁnal
phase-space location are also insensitive to a variation of
Bcr . However, although such variations thus may have a
signiﬁcant effect on some individual orbits, we found no
FIG. 1. ~Color! Color-coded magnetic ﬁeld Bz in the equatorial plane for t56–9 min, as obtained in the underlying MHD simulation ~Ref. 20!. The red
contour represents the neutral line Bz50, and black lines are contours of constant positive Ey , shown at multiples of 4 mV/m.
1829
Phys. Plasmas, Vol. 11, No. 5, May 2004
Electron acceleration in the dynamic magnetotail . . .
 19 March 2026 21:02:29


---

<!-- Page 7 -->

strong effect on the general characteristics of ﬂuxes to be
discussed later.
B. Characteristic acceleration
Figure 3 illustrates the typical acceleration of electrons.
The top part of each ﬁgure shows sections of a characteristic
electron orbit in a perspective view from the earthward side,
whereas the bottom parts show the magnitude of the particle
energy above the equatorial crossing points of the orbit. Fig-
ure 3~a! illustrates the most typical orbit of accelerated elec-
trons with energies above approximately 100 keV. The elec-
tron originates from the duskward boundary, bounces many
times between the mirror points ~or between the reﬂection
points at the boundary x525 when the pitch angle is
smaller!, while drifting towards the center tail. When it
reaches the central region of earthward collapse it partici-
pates in the drift and becomes accelerated through a betatron
or Fermi mechanism, depending on the pitch angle. Except
for the bounce motion, this is similar to the history of typical
90° pitch-angle accelerated electrons investigated in Ref. 17.
A variant of this history is shown by Fig. 3~b! for a
different ﬁnal pitch angle. This particle also starts from the
dusk boundary but from an orbit with an equatorial crossing
point farther out, tailward of the reconnection site. When this
particle approaches the center tail, it becomes trapped on the
earthward section of a ﬁeld line that undergoes reconnection.
Subsequently, it participates also in the earthward collapse.
The bottom part of Fig. 4 shows that essentially all of the
acceleration takes place during this collapse.
Figure 3~c! shows an orbit that is more typical at lower
energies of tens of keV. Since the cross-tail drift is less sig-
niﬁcant at these energies, the electrons typically start out
inside the boundaries at the initial tracking time. The particle
drifts slowly earthward and toward the center until it reaches
the inner tail region and participates in the earthward drift.
Again, this is the part of the major acceleration.
All orbits shown in Fig. 3 share the fact that the major
acceleration occurs while the electron participates in the
earthward convection of dipolarizing ﬁeld lines. When the
pitch angle is close to 90° this can easily be understood as
betatron acceleration. When the pitch angle is smaller, the
acceleration can also be understood as an adiabatic process,
namely Fermi acceleration of a particle that bounces between
mirror points within a ﬂux tube that becomes shorter as it
dipolarizes and moves towards the Earth. This is a combina-
tion of Fermi type ‘‘A’’ and type ‘‘B’’,26 where type A cor-
FIG. 2. ~Color! Equatorial crossing points of orbits traced backwards in time
from t58 min at x5210, y5z50 with a ﬁnal pitch angle of a585° and
an energy of 180 keV. The orbits are superposed on contours of constant
cross-tail electric ﬁeld ~black lines!, taken at t57 min. Orbit ~a! ~red curve!
corresponds to ucr5100 in ~21!, while orbits ~b! and ~c! ~green and blue
curves, respectively! correspond to ucr5200, and pitch angles a585° and
a585.0001°. The dots mark the transition from full orbits to drift orbits, or
vice versa in each case.
FIG. 3. ~Color! Characteristic orbits traced backwards in time from x5210 RE , y50, z50. The top parts shows selected bounce orbits in a perspective view
from the earthward side ~red lines! above the equatorial crossing points of the orbit ~blue line!, whereas the bottom part shows the magnitude of the particle
energy ~red line! above the equatorial crossing points ~blue line!. The ﬁgures correspond to ~a! a ﬁnal energy of 180 keV and a pitch angle a515°; ~b! 180
keV and a580°; and ~c! 180 keV and a a515°, respectively.
1830
Phys. Plasmas, Vol. 11, No. 5, May 2004
Birn, Thomsen, and Hesse
 19 March 2026 21:02:29


---

<!-- Page 8 -->

responds to the effects of particle reﬂection in a mirror ﬁeld,
while type B denotes the effects of ﬁeld-aligned motion
along a moving curved magnetic ﬁeld line, such as those
crossing the neutral sheet. This is illustrated by the orbit
shown in Fig. 4, which is integrated backwards from t
57 min at x5210, y50, z50 with a ﬁnal energy of 180
keV and pitch angle of 45°. The top panels show different
projections of the orbit, and the bottom panel shows the en-
ergy above the location in x. Red portions of the orbit belong
to full orbit integration. It is obvious from this ﬁgure that, in
the ﬁxed frame, the acceleration takes place exclusively dur-
ing the neutral sheet traversals, because that is the region
where the electric ﬁeld is concentrated. It does not matter
whether the full orbit is integrated or the drift approximation
is used. This shows that the acceleration at small pitch angles
resembles Fermi type-B acceleration, which is equivalent to
neutral sheet or current sheet acceleration, as discussed by
Ref. 30. In this frame, the mirroring closer to the Earth does
not change the energy but is important in providing multiple
neutral sheet crossings. However, in a frame that moves with
the equatorial crossing point of the ﬁeld line, the particle
acceleration results from the reﬂection at the moving mirrors,
so that the whole process is indeed a combination of type-A
and type-B Fermi acceleration.
IV. CHARACTERISTICS OF PHASE-SPACE
DISTRIBUTIONS
In this section we will investigate characteristic pitch-
angle variations at various energies. In order to compare ﬂux
levels at different energies, we need to evaluate the values of
the distribution function f. This can be done by using Liou-
ville’s theorem of the conservation of f along the phase-space
trajectory and imposing initial and boundary distributions
consistent with the moments of the MHD simulation. We use
the same initial and boundary distributions as in our previous
investigation of equatorial electron orbits,17 deﬁned as kappa
distributions31,32
f5fˆF11
E
~k21.5!EoG
2k21
,
~24!
with
k52.5,
Eo50.5 keV,
~25!
neglecting again spatial variations of the characteristic pa-
rameters in ~24!. Since the plasma sheet density and tempera-
ture in the MHD run do not vary strongly, this neglect has
little effect when particles originate from the plasma sheet.
Also, the earthward beams of particles in the plasma sheet
boundary layer have similar value of the phase-space density.
However, the plasma in the lobes is signiﬁcantly cooler and
more tenuous than the plasma sheet plasma, so that the
mapped ﬂux values should be reduced when particles origi-
nate from the lobes. This becomes important primarily for
electrons at energies below ;100 keV at later times, when
lobe ﬁeld lines reconnect.
Figure 5 shows the pitch-angle variation of the phase-
space distribution f at the location x5210, y50, z50 for
an energy of 180 keV and various times as indicated. There
are strong pitch-angle anisotropies, which may vary as a
function of time, but with a preference for enhanced ﬂuxes
near 90° pitch angles. This region widens with time. Figure 6
demonstrates that this feature persists over a wide energy
range, by showing the pitch-angle variation of f at t58 min
at the same location for energies between 5 and 500 keV. At
lower energies, additional peaks near 0° and 180° become
evident, which are even higher than the peak near 90°.
In principle, the distributions in Figs. 5 and 6 should be
exactly symmetric around a590°, if the starting phase loca-
tions were exactly symmetric. However, due to the random
phase shifts at orbit transitions, and to the aforementioned
chaotic effects, individual orbits can vary signiﬁcantly from
FIG. 4. ~Color! Electron orbit integrated backwards from t57 min at x
5210, y50, z50 with a ﬁnal energy of 180 keV and pitch angle of 45°.
The top panels show different projections of the orbit, and the bottom panel
shows the energy above the location in x. Red portions of the orbit belong to
full orbit integration.
FIG. 5. Pitch-angle variation of the phase-space distribution f at x5210,
y50, z50 for an energy of 180 keV and various times as indicated.
1831
Phys. Plasmas, Vol. 11, No. 5, May 2004
Electron acceleration in the dynamic magnetotail . . .
 19 March 2026 21:02:29


---

<!-- Page 9 -->

their symmetry partners. Nevertheless, the main features of
the ﬁgures are quite symmetric and consistent on either side
of a590°. A similar result was obtained when we changed
the value of the transition parameter ucr in ~21!.
The preferential enhancement of ﬂuxes around 90° pitch
angles suggests that an investigation of those pitch angles
alone might result in an overestimation of ﬂux increases.
This is conﬁrmed by Fig. 7, which shows electron distribu-
tion functions, averaged over 18 pitch angles, at x5210, y
50, z50 before (t56 min) and after the injection (t
57 min), calculated from an initial kappa distribution ~dot-
ted line!. For comparison, we also include the distribution of
90° electrons, as obtained in Ref. 17. This clearly demon-
strates that consideration of 90° pitch-angle electrons alone
may lead to a considerable overestimate of ﬂuxes, whereas
the main temporal features, particularly the rise of ﬂuxes,
may be similar. The change in the model distribution func-
tion in Fig. 7 is quite similar to the changes in observed
distributions shown in Ref. 17. Flux increases occur only in
a limited energy range, which extends from about 1 to 500
keV in the simulation.
Similar to results obtained for 90° pitch angles, the dis-
tribution function in Fig. 7 at t56 min is already distorted
from the source distribution by an increase that ranges from
a few keV to ;50 keV. Again, this may be attributed to an
early weaker increase of the electric ﬁeld, which may even
occur during the substorm growth phase. This is also consis-
tent with observations.8
V. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
Extending previous work,17 we have investigated prop-
erties of substorm-associated electron injections on the basis
of test particle simulations in the time-dependent magnetic
and electric ﬁelds of an MHD simulation of magnetotail
dynamics.20
This
MHD
simulation
combines
self-
consistently the two main features commonly considered for
particle acceleration in the inner magnetotail: a near-Earth
x-type magnetic neutral line, located approximately at 18 RE
from the near-Earth boundary of the simulation box (23 RE
from the center of the dipole!, and the collapse and dipolar-
ization of the innermost tail region earthward from the neu-
tral line. The strongest induced electric ﬁelds develop in this
region rather than in the immediate vicinity of the neutral
line.
In the previous investigation17 we considered only elec-
tron orbits in the equatorial plane, which is a symmetry plane
of the MHD simulation. Here, we extended the analysis to
arbitrary pitch angles and off-equatorial orbits. Also, we
switched between gyrocenter drift orbits and full orbit inte-
gration depending upon the validity of the drift approxima-
tion. This happens primarily at neutral sheet crossings rela-
tively close to the near-Earth neutral line. Higher-energy
electrons ~hundreds of keV! that contribute to the ﬂux in-
creases in the near tail typically did not approach the neutral
line very closely during their history, due to their strong
cross-tail drift. In contrast, lower-energy electrons ~a few
keV to tens of keV! follow more closely the history of ﬁeld
line ‘‘motion,’’ as given by the EÃB drift. They have hence
been close to the neutral line, while the ﬁeld line was under-
going reconnection. As a paradoxical consequence, full orbit
integration thus becomes necessary at lower energies, during
part of the orbit, while the drift approximation can be applied
fully for many of the higher-energy orbits.
As in our earlier investigations,16,17 we found that accel-
eration in the inner collapsing tail region is relatively more
important for ﬂux increases in the near tail than the energy
gain from the cross-tail motion near the neutral line. For
particles in the vicinity of the equatorial plane with pitch
angles close to 90 deg, this acceleration can be understood as
betatron acceleration. Particles with small pitch angles can
be viewed as following a collapsing ﬁeld line through many
bounces. Since the ﬁeld line becomes shorter as it dipolarizes
and approaches the Earth, the acceleration mechanism can be
understood as Fermi acceleration. An investigation of the
acceleration during such a multiple bounce orbit shows that
the acceleration, in a ﬁxed frame, takes place during the rela-
tively short neutral sheet crossing, where the large cross-tail
electric ﬁeld is localized. The acceleration of the small pitch-
angle electrons hence can be understood as multiple Fermi
FIG. 6. Pitch-angle variation of the phase-space distribution f for t58 min
at x5210, y50, z50, and energies between 5 and 500 keV, as indicated.
FIG. 7. Electron distribution function at x5210, y50, z50 before (t
56 min; dash-dotted line! and after the injection (t57 min; solid line!,
calculated from an initial kappa distribution ~dotted line!, averaged over 18
pitch angles. For comparison, the distribution of 90° electrons, as obtained
in Ref. 17, is also included ~dashed line!.
1832
Phys. Plasmas, Vol. 11, No. 5, May 2004
Birn, Thomsen, and Hesse
 19 March 2026 21:02:29


---

<!-- Page 10 -->

type-B acceleration,26 equivalent to neutral sheet or current
sheet acceleration, as discussed in Ref. 30. In a frame that
moves with the equatorial crossing point of an earthward
convecting ﬁeld line, the acceleration results from the reﬂec-
tion at the moving mirrors, corresponding to Fermi type-A
acceleration,26 so that the whole process is a combination of
both types.
The dominant source region of accelerated electrons at
higher energies ~above ;100 keV! is the dusk ﬂank plasma
sheet, primarily earthward of the neutral line, although the
more distant plasma sheet and plasma sheet boundary layer
may also contribute. This explains why models that concen-
trate on equatorial drift orbits only15,17,18 still capture the
dominant mechanism. In contrast, the more distant plasma
sheet and the plasma sheet boundary layer are the more
dominant source at lower energies and at the beginning of
reconnection, before lobe reconnection starts ~note that lobe
reconnection starts later at larger uyu).
Although we found that electrons can become acceler-
ated at both small and large pitch angles, through Fermi and
betatron acceleration, respectively, the effects may differ. At
the speciﬁc location considered, near the earthward edge of
the injection region, we ﬁnd an anisotropy with enhanced
ﬂuxes at both small and large ~near 90°! pitch angles but
reduced or unchanged ﬂuxes at intermediate angles. The en-
hancement near 90° is more pronounced, so that the net re-
sult might be an enhancement of perpendicular pressure.
However, pitch-angle scattering mechanisms, resulting from
small-scale ﬂuctuations not contained in the MHD model,
could reduce or even eliminate the pitch-angle dependence
of the ﬂux increases.
In summary, the results obtained by generalized orbit
integration conﬁrm the results obtained earlier by equatorial
drifts only. The effects of the MHD ﬁelds on the test elec-
trons thus can explain major features of electron injections,
speciﬁcally the limited energy range and the relative amount
of the ﬂux increases. This further supports the view that the
mechanisms of cross-tail acceleration and ﬁeld collapse or
dipolarization
of
the
inner
tail
~‘‘convection
surge
mechanism’’24,25! are the major mechanisms responsible not
only for ion acceleration and injection but also for electron
injections in the inner magnetotail. The test orbits show that
the electric ﬁeld associated with the collapse is most signiﬁ-
cant for the inner edge of the region of enhanced electron
ﬂuxes ~injection boundary!, as well as for the ion injection
boundary.16
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by the U.S. Department of En-
ergy’s Ofﬁce of Basic Energy Sciences through its Geo-
sciences Research Program and by NASA’s Sun Earth Con-
nection Theory Program.
1T. W. Lezniak and J. R. Winckler, J. Geophys. Res. 75, 7075 ~1970!.
2D. N. Baker, P. R. Higbie, E. W. Hones, Jr., and R. D. Belian, J. Geophys.
Res. 83, 4863 ~1978!.
3K. N. Erickson, R. L. Swanson, R. J. Walker, and J. R. Winckler, J. Geo-
phys. Res. 84, 931 ~1979!.
4W. D. Cummings, J. N. Barﬁeld, and P. J. Coleman, J. Geophys. Res. 73,
6687 ~1968!.
5B. T. Thomas and P. Hedgecock, ‘‘Substorm effects in the neutral sheet
inside 10 RE ,’’ in Magnetospheres of the Earth and Jupiter, edited by P.
Formisano ~Reidel, Norwell, MA, 1975!, p. 55.
6T. L. Aggson, J. P. Heppner, and N. C. Maynard, J. Geophys. Res. 88,
3981 ~1983!.
7G. D. Reeves, R. D. Belian, and T. A. Fritz, J. Geophys. Res. 96, 13997
~1991!.
8J. Birn, M. F. Thomsen, J. E. Borovsky, G. D. Reeves, D. J. McComas, and
R. D. Belian, J. Geophys. Res. 102, 15345 ~1997!.
9M. F. Thomsen, J. Birn, J. E. Borovsky, K. M. Morzinski, D. J. McComas,
and G. D. Reeves, J. Geophys. Res. 106, 8405 ~2001!.
10M. Ashour-Abdalla, J. P. Berchem, J. Bu¨chner, and L. M. Zelenyi, J.
Geophys. Res. 98, 5651 ~1993!.
11D. C. Delcourt and J. A. Sauvaud, J. Geophys. Res. 99, 97 ~1994!.
12I. Doxas, T. W. Speiser, P. B. Dusenbery, and W. Horton, J. Geophys. Res.
99, 2375 ~1994!.
13J. Birn and M. Hesse, J. Geophys. Res. 99, 109 ~1994!.
14G. Joyce, J. Chen, S. Slinker, D. L. Holland, and J. B. Harold, J. Geophys.
Res. 100, 19167 ~1995!.
15X. Li, D. N. Baker, M. Temerin, and G. D. Reeves, Geophys. Res. Lett.
25, 3763 ~1998!.
16J. Birn, M. F. Thomsen, J. E. Borovsky, G. D. Reeves, D. J. McComas, R.
D. Belian, and M. Hesse, J. Geophys. Res. 102, 2325 ~1997!.
17J. Birn, M. F. Thomsen, J. E. Borovsky, G. D. Reeves, D. J. McComas, R.
D. Belian, and M. Hesse, J. Geophys. Res. 103, 9235 ~1998!.
18S. Zaharia, C. Z. Cheng, and J. R. Johnson, J. Geophys. Res. 105, 18741
~2000!.
19J. Bu¨chner and L. Zelenyi, J. Geophys. Res. 92, 13456 ~1987!.
20J. Birn and M. Hesse, J. Geophys. Res. 101, 15345 ~1996!.
21G. Erickson and R. Wolf, Geophys. Res. Lett. 7, 897 ~1980!.
22K. Schindler and J. Birn, J. Geophys. Res. 87, 2263 ~1982!.
23C. Chen and R. Wolf, J. Geophys. Res. 98, 21409 ~1993!.
24J. M. Quinn and D. J. Southwood, J. Geophys. Res. 87, 10536 ~1982!.
25B. H. Mauk, J. Geophys. Res. 91, 13423 ~1986!.
26T. G. Northrop, The Adiabatic Motion of Charged Particles ~Wiley, New
York, 1963!.
27A. A. Chan, J. Geophys. Res. 103, 20501 ~1998!.
28J. M. Hyman, SIAM ~Soc. Ind. Appl. Math.! J. Sci. Stat. Comput. 4, 645
~1983!.
29D. B. Curran and C. K. Goertz, J. Geophys. Res. 94, 272 ~1989!.
30L. R. Lyons, J. Geophys. Res. 89, 5479 ~1984!.
31V. Vasyliunas, J. Geophys. Res. 73, 2839 ~1968!.
32S. P. Christon, D. J. Williams, and D. G. Mitchell, J. Geophys. Res. 96, 1
~1991!.
1833
Phys. Plasmas, Vol. 11, No. 5, May 2004
Electron acceleration in the dynamic magnetotail . . .
 19 March 2026 21:02:29
