<!-- Page 1 -->

Journal of Geophysical Research: Space Physics
High-resolution global magnetohydrodynamic simulation
of bursty bulk ﬂows
M. Wiltberger1, V. Merkin2, J. G. Lyon3, and S. Ohtani2
1High-Altitude Observatory, National Center for Atmospheric Research, Boulder, Colorado, USA, 2Johns Hopkins
University Applied Physics Laboratory, Laurel, Maryland, USA, 3Department of Physics and Astronomy, Dartmouth
College, Hanover, New Hampshire, USA
Abstract A high-resolution global magnetohydrodynamic simulation is conducted with the
Lyon-Fedder-Mobarry (LFM) model for idealized solar wind conditions. Within the simulation results
high-speed ﬂows are seen throughout the magnetotail when the interplanetary magnetic ﬁeld (IMF)
is southward. Case study analysis of these ﬂows shows that they have an enhancement in BZ and a
decrease in density preceding a peak in the ﬂow velocity. A careful examination of the structure within the
magnetotail shows that these features are driven by bursts of magnetic reconnection. In addition to the
case study, a superposed epoch analysis of ﬂows occurring during a 90 min interval of southward IMF yields
statistical properties that are in qualitative agreement with observational analysis of bursty bulk ﬂows
(BBFs). For the idealized simulation conditions, the most signiﬁcant diﬀerences with the observational
results are a broader velocity proﬁle in time, which becomes narrower away from the center of the current
sheet, and a larger density drop after ﬂow passage. The peak BZ amplitude is larger than in observations and
precedes the peak in the ﬂow velocity. We conclude that the LFM simulations are reproducing the statistical
features of BBFs and that they are driven by spatially and temporally localized reconnection events within
the simulation domain.
1. Introduction
As observations of the Earth’s magnetosphere have improved, our picture of the structure of the magneto-
tail has moved from the idealized convection picture of Dungey [1963] to one with highly structured ﬂows
revealed by missions like Active Magnetospheric Particle Tracer Explorers/Ion Release Module (AMPTE/IRM)
and ISEE2 [e.g., Angelopoulos et al., 1994], Geotail [e.g., Ohtani et al., 2004], Cluster [e.g., Nakamura et al., 2004],
and Time History of Events and Macroscale Interactions during Substorms (THEMIS) [e.g., Runov et al., 2009].
Magnetotail simulations [e.g., Birn et al., 2011] have provided insights about the origins of these ﬂows. In
addition, global-scale simulations have provided meaningful insights about boundary layer formation in the
magnetotail [e.g., Raeder et al., 1997], magnetotail ﬂow dynamics [e.g., Wiltberger et al., 2000; Ge et al., 2011],
and more recently impact of ionospheric outﬂow [e.g., Glocer et al., 2009; Brambles et al., 2010] on tail dynam-
ics. In this paper we compare the results of a high-resolution global simulation with observations of the
magnetotail.
Using data from the AMPTE/IRM satellite, Angelopoulos et al. [1992] examined high-speed ﬂows in the inner
plasma sheet and used the term bursty bulk ﬂows (BBFs) to characterize these phenomena. Using 2 years
of ﬂow data, they found that BBFs exist on a 10 min timescale with the peak ﬂow velocity typically being
reached within a minute. They also found that these ﬂows are associated with magnetic ﬁeld dipolarization. In
a statistical analysis of the BBF event data Angelopoulos et al. [1994] found that BBFs account for a signiﬁcant
fraction of the earthward mass, energy, and magnetic ﬂux transport in the inner plasma sheet. More recently,
Ohtani et al. [2004] (subsequently referred to as Ohtani2004) conducted a superposed epoch analysis (SEA)
of the Geotail measurements of fast ﬂows throughout the plasma sheet between X = −10RE and X = −31RE.
In these observations they found that the magnetic ﬁeld becomes more dipolar over the course of the ﬂow
with the plasma density and pressure decreasing. Comparing these observations with two ﬂuid simulations
of magnetic reconnection, they conclude that the observational features of BBFs are related to the magnetic
islands, generated by reconnection occurring between multiple X lines, that are then carried downstream by
the ﬂows generated from the reconnection process.
RESEARCH ARTICLE
10.1002/2015JA021080
Key Points:
• High-resolution LFM simulations
contain BBFs
• BBFs have statistical properties similar
to observations
• BBFs are generated by reconnection
within simulation
Supporting Information:
• Movie S1
• Movie S2
• Movies S1 and S2 captions
Correspondence to:
M. Wiltberger,
wiltbemj@ucar.edu
Citation:
Wiltberger, M., V. Merkin, J. G. Lyon,
and S. Ohtani (2015), High-resolution
global magnetohydrodynamic
simulation of bursty bulk ﬂows,
J. Geophys. Res. Space Physics,
120, 4555–4566,
doi:10.1002/2015JA021080.
Received 2 FEB 2015
Accepted 13 MAY 2015
Accepted article online 18 MAY 2015
Published online 10 JUN 2015
©2015.
American Geophysical Union.
All Rights Reserved.
WILTBERGER ET AL.
HIGH-RES MHD BBF SIMULATION
4555


---

<!-- Page 2 -->

Journal of Geophysical Research: Space Physics
10.1002/2015JA021080
Additional analysis of the evolution and propagation of fast ﬂows has been conducted using observations
from the multispacecraft Cluster [Balogh et al., 2001; Rème et al., 2001] and THEMIS [Angelopoulos, 2008] mis-
sions. Taking advantage of the spatial separation of the Cluster spacecraft, Nakamura et al. [2004] determined
the lateral size of the high-speed ﬂows in the midtail region (X < −15RE) to be 2–3 RE. Further, Runov et al.
[2009] (hereafter Runov2009) exploited the spatial alignment of the THEMIS spacecraft in the magnetotail
from roughly −20RE to −10RE to examine the propagation of a dipolarization front (DF) through the central
plasmasheet.Theyfoundthatitwasacoherentlypropagatingstructurethroughoutthisregionwithavelocity
of300km/sandafrontthicknessonthescaleoftheioninternallength.Acomparisonwithparticle-in-cell(PIC)
simulations conducted by Sitnov et al. [2009] led Runov2009 to the interpretation that the front was formed
by a burst of reconnection in the midtail region. Using a small set of observations, Runov et al. [2011] exam-
ined the rapid (< 30s) changes of the magnetic ﬁeld associated with DFs. They found a rapid 50% decrease in
plasma density and transient enhancements of earthward electric ﬁeld on scales comparable to the ion ther-
mal gyroradius. Also, using THEMIS data, Dubyagin et al. [2011] were able to conclude that the initial ﬂux tube
entropy of the BBF is a strong predictor for how far it will propagate into the inner magnetosphere with the
stopping location occurring when the entropy inside the BBF matches the local background entropy.
In addition to the two ﬂuid and PIC simulations used to support the conclusions drawn by Ohtani2004 and
Runov2009 that the BBFs and DFs are driven by magnetic reconnection bursts in the magnetotail, other
simulation studies have been conducted to investigate the evolution of these processes. Birn et al. [1996] con-
ducted magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) simulations of the magnetotail to demonstrate a connection between
plasmoid formation and the dipolarization of inner magnetosphere building upon the theoretical work of
Pontius and Wolf [1990]. In their later work with MHD magnetotail simulations Birn et al. [2004] examined the
propagation of bubbles in the magnetotail by artiﬁcially reducing the ﬂux tube entropy in a small region in
the midtail of the simulation domain. This region propagates earthward at a ﬂow speed that depends upon
the width and depletion amount of the initial bubble. They also found ﬁeld-aligned currents (FACs) gener-
ated by the vortical ﬂows along the edges of these bubbles that are consistent with the current systems and
auroral features of BBFs. They conclude that reduction of ﬂux tube entropy in the bubble is an essential ele-
ment for earthward propagation of the bubble. Birnetal. [2011] performed additional MHD simulations of the
magnetotail where bubbles are originated by magnetic reconnection. They found that features of earthward
propagating dipolarization fronts, namely, their rebound and azimuthal expansion during the breaking in the
near-Earth region, are consistent with the satellite observations of Cluster and THEMIS.
Inadditiontotheregionalmagnetotailsimulations,global-scaleMHDsimulationsofthemagnetospherehave
also been used to study fast ﬂows in the magnetotail. Wiltberger et al. [2000] simulated an isolated substorm
with the Lyon-Fedder-Mobarry (LFM) global MHD magnetosphere model [Lyon et al., 2004]. In the simulation
results they found several fast ﬂow channels in the magnetotail with plasma and magnetic ﬁeld properties
that agreed favorably with the observations of BBFs made by Angelopoulos et al. [1992]. Guild et al. [2008] con-
ducted a comparison of the ﬂow variability seen in Geotail measurements within the central plasma sheet
and results from the LFM simulations. The novel method in this study was to compare 2 months of simulation
results with 6 years of Geotail observations. They found that the probability distribution functions (PDFs) of
fast ﬂows were in agreement between the simulations and observations. In addition, the level of agreement
improved as model resolution was increased, especially with respect to capturing the high-speed tails of the
ﬂow PDFs. Pembroke et al. [2012] showed that dipolarization fronts and BBFs occurred during a steady mag-
netospheric convection (SMC)-like state in the coupled LFM-Rice Convection Model (RCM) model and that
the high-speed channels were associated with depleted ﬂux tube entropy in agreement with the previous
simulations by Birn et al. [2004, 2011].
Other studies have been conducted comparing results from global simulations with observations from the
THEMIS mission. Ge et al. [2011] used the OpenGGCM [Raeder et al., 2008] to simulate the 27 February 2009
substorm that was the focus of the Runov2009 study of dipolarization front propagation. They concluded that
the auroral breakup in the simulation is caused by the ﬂow vortices formed around the BBF ﬂows as predicted
by the Birnetal. [2004] idealized magnetotail simulation. Detailed investigation of the simulation results in the
magnetotail showed that the dipolar BZ signature seen at the leading edge of the BBF is due to the interaction
of plasma ﬂows originating from multiple X lines. This study shows how the features of BBFs can be compli-
cated by the interactions present in global simulations that are not present in idealized tail or reconnection
conﬁgurations. Ashour-Abdalla et al. [2011] combined global-scale MHD simulations with test particle simu-
lations to examine the processes energizing electrons during an event on 15 February 2008 that had THEMIS
WILTBERGER ET AL.
HIGH-RES MHD BBF SIMULATION
4556
 21699402, 2015, 6, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/2015JA021080 by Rice University, Wiley Online Library on [17/02/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


---

<!-- Page 3 -->

Journal of Geophysical Research: Space Physics
10.1002/2015JA021080
observations. They concluded that the low-energy component, a few keV, of the electron particle popula-
tion is heated by diﬀusion processes within the reconnection region. The higher-energy component, order
100 keV, of the electron distribution function is the result of betatron acceleration within the dipolarization
fronts that originate from the diﬀusion region.
Despite the progress made with regional and global MHD simulations on understanding of BBFs and associ-
ated dipolarizations, many questions remain. In particular, what features of temporal and spatial proﬁles of
key plasma and magnetic ﬁeld properties do simulations consistently reproduce? Earlier statistical compar-
isons [Guild et al., 2008] were limited in resolution and restricted the analysis to probability distributions. At
the same time, event simulations [e.g., Ge et al., 2011], while revealing a detailed structure of BBFs and dipo-
larization fronts during a particular situation, do not necessarily generalize to a broader class of conditions.
The focus of this work is to utilize high-resolution LFM simulations of the magnetosphere to examine the
origin and evolution of high-speed ﬂows in the magnetotail and to compare those results with observations in
terms of statistical properties of the magnetic ﬁeld and plasma parameters along the BBFs. This paper begins
in section 2 with an introduction to the LFM model and an overview of the high-resolution simulation used
in this study. Analysis of the BBFs in the simulation is presented in terms of a case study and a superposed
epoch analysis in section 3. The paper ﬁnishes with a review of the simulation results and a summary of our
conclusions.
2. High-Resolution LFM Model and Simulation Overview
In this paper we present results from the LFM using a high-resolution grid in the magnetosphere and iono-
sphere. The computational kernel remains the same as that described by Lyon et al. [2004], but grid size
in each computational dimension has been at least quadrupled from previous research [Lyon et al., 1998;
Pulkkinen and Wiltberger, 2000; Lopez et al., 2006; Wiltberger et al., 2012]. While the numerical techniques
remain the same, this version of the code did require new software data structures in order to operate
eﬃciently on modern high-performance computing platforms. Merkin et al. [2013a] compared results from
simulations at this resolution with observations of global ﬁeld-aligned current made by the Active Magneto-
sphere and Planetary Electrodynamics Response Experiment [Anderson et al., 2002] and found them to be in
good agreement.
In this study we use a computational grid that has the Z axis aligned with the magnetic dipole, the X axis
pointing in the direction of the Sun, and the Y axis completing the right-handed coordinate system. Through-
out the simulation interval there is no dipole tilt or corotation electric ﬁeld. The high-resolution version of
the model has 212 radial, 256 azimuthal, and 192 polar grid cells. The locations of these cells are designed to
provide high resolution in regions known a priori to be important, e.g., bow shock, magnetopause, and mag-
netotail. In the midtail the typical cell size is approximately 0.2 RE. The computational grid extends 30 RE in
the direction of the Sun and 330 RE down the tail. The radial distance of the grid in the Y and Z directions
is 124 RE. For the results presented in this paper the LFM was run with full ionospheric conductance model
[Wiltberger et al., 2009] as part of the electrostatic potential calculation used to set the boundary condition for
the velocity at 2 RE inner boundary sphere in the LFM computational grid [Merkin and Lyon, 2010].
The LFM was run using idealized solar wind conditions to produce the results presented in this paper. The
solar wind number density was held ﬁxed at 5 #/cm3, and the X component of the solar wind velocity was
ﬁxed at 400 km/s with the other components of the solar wind velocity set to zero. The X and Y components
of the interplanetary magnetic ﬁeld (IMF) are also set to zero throughout the entire simulation interval. The
Z component of the IMF is −5 nT for the ﬁrst 2 h and switches to +5 nT for the next 2 h. At 04 simulation
time (ST) the IMF returns to a southward conﬁguration at −5 nT and remains at that value for the duration of
the simulation interval. This solar wind conﬁguration is typical for idealized studies and is designed to allow
the simulation time to develop a well-formed magnetosphere. The simulation was run in a time step dump
mode with output generated every 1000 computational steps. Given the fact that the LFM has a dynamic time
step, based upon satisfying the Courant condition, this translates to output approximately every 20 s, but the
amount of time between dumps can vary throughout the simulation interval.
Figure 1 shows snapshots taken from the scientiﬁc visualization included in the supporting information that
are part of the online version of this article. In each panel the background cut plane is at Z = 0 and is col-
ored by the diﬀerence between the BZ and the value of dipole ﬁeld at that location. A divergent green/purple
color table is used with stronger green colors indicating a compression of ﬁeld. The compression of the ﬁeld
WILTBERGER ET AL.
HIGH-RES MHD BBF SIMULATION
4557
 21699402, 2015, 6, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/2015JA021080 by Rice University, Wiley Online Library on [17/02/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


---

<!-- Page 4 -->

Journal of Geophysical Research: Space Physics
10.1002/2015JA021080
Figure 1. Snapshots from the scientiﬁc visualization of the magnetotail structure during the simulation interval. In each
panel the background cut plane is at Z = 0 and is colored by the diﬀerence between the BZ and the value of dipole ﬁeld
at that location. The colored vector arrows correspond to the 3-D direction of the plasma velocity. Both the length of the
vector and the color correspond to the magnitude of the velocity. The blue contour line is drawn at the BZ = 0 value
and provides a rough indication of the boundary between open and closed ﬁeld lines. (a) Simulation at 04:30:04 ST
approximately 30 min after the arrival of southward IMF. (b) A single ﬂow channel is clearly seen at 05:05:16 ST, (c) while
multiple ﬂow channels are present at 05:24:17 ST. (d) Conﬁguration at the end of the simulation interval 06:00:13 ST.
on the dayside and the stretching on the nightside are clearly evident throughout the animation and in
Figures 1a–1d. The colored vector arrows correspond to the 3-D direction of the plasma velocity shown on
a 1 RE grid between −5RE and −50RE in X and ±15RE in Y. Both the length of the vector and the color corre-
spond to the magnitude of the velocity. The velocity vector ﬁeld uses a black body color table with red and
black indicating the strongest ﬂows. The full velocity vector is being used to construct the glyphs so it can
have a component in the Z direction perpendicular to XY plane. The blue contour line is drawn at the BZ = 0
value and provides a rough indication of the boundary between open and closed ﬁeld lines. The X and Y axes
in the plot have major tick marks every 20 RE and minor tick marks every 2 RE. The simulation time is shown
in lower left-hand corner of each panel and the visualization.
The scientiﬁc visualization begins at 03:47:48 ST by showing the state of the magnetosphere during the end of
the northward IMF interval being used to precondition the magnetosphere. The bow shock, magnetosheath,
and magnetopause are clearly evident on the dayside of the magnetopause. In the magnetotail we see very
little activity in the plasma ﬂows as expected after nearly 2 h of northward IMF conditions. At 04:00 ST the
change in IMF direction has reached the X = 0 line and is clearly visible in the compression region behind
the bow shock. From 04:00 to 04:30 ST as the southward IMF transition propagates downstream, the forma-
tion of several well-developed Kelvin-Helmholtz (KH) vortices along the ﬂanks of the magnetopause is clearly
evident. Claudepierre et al. [2008] have analyzed KH vortices in lower resolution LFM simulation results, and
Merkin et al. [2013b] have conducted a detailed analysis of the KH structure at this resolution.
Figure 1a shows the state of the simulation at 04:30:04 ST. In the magnetotail earthward of −50RE not much
ﬂow has developed and the BZ = 0 contour line is only just visible near the X axis. Between 04:30:04 ST and
the next frame shown in Figure 1b at 05:05:16 ST two narrow channels of high-speed ﬂow are seen to prop-
agate from beyond X = −50RE into the view of the visualization. One channel begins to enter visualization
domain around 04:55 ST on the dawnside of the magnetotail with a second channel entering on the dusk side
at 05:01 ST. The channel on the dawnside propagates earthward along a constant Y value for approximately
WILTBERGER ET AL.
HIGH-RES MHD BBF SIMULATION
4558
 21699402, 2015, 6, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/2015JA021080 by Rice University, Wiley Online Library on [17/02/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


---

<!-- Page 5 -->

Journal of Geophysical Research: Space Physics
10.1002/2015JA021080
5 min. The high-speed channel is a few RE wide with a compression of the magnetic ﬁeld at the leading edge
that is approximately a factor of 2 times wider in extent than the ﬂow channel following behind it. While the
width of these channels is several times larger than the local grid resolution, the width of these ﬂow channels
is still governed, in part, by the numerical resolution of the simulation. The channels in the lower resolution
simulations of Wiltberger et al. [2000] have broader widths around 5–7 RE. At the time of Figure 1b the ﬂow
has made a signiﬁcant change in direction propagating toward the X axis while still maintaining signiﬁcant
earthward ﬂow component. Furthermore, at approximately X = −36RE and Y = −8RE it is clear that reconnec-
tion is occurring along the BZ = 0 contour with divergent ﬂow originating from this region. The duskside ﬂow
channel is a bit broader in width and has nearly reached its most earthward extent by the time of Figure 1b.
As seen at 05:24:17 ST in Figure 1c the structure of the magnetotail grows more complicated as the driving
of the magnetosphere by southward IMF continues. Multiple narrow ﬂow channels are seen to be originating
from the BZ = 0 contour line threading through the magnetotail in the vicinity of X = −35RE. The presence of
reconnection-driven ﬂows is not uniform in either time or distance along the BZ = 0 contour. At 05:24:17 ST
at least four diﬀerent ﬂow channels are clearly evident propagating earthward from the BZ = 0 contour. The
width of the high-speed ﬂow portion of these channels grows narrower with distance from the origination
region. They are typically a few RE in width in the near-Earth magnetotail. The leading edge of all the channels
contains a region of stronger BZ ﬁeld that propagates earthward. The path that any given ﬂow channel takes
does not appear to be uniformalthough thereis slighttendencytopropagatealongroughlyconstantY values
during the initial phase and then to make direction changes as they continue to propagate earthward.
At the end of the simulation interval 06:00:13 ST the state of the magnetotail is shown in Figure 1d. The sys-
tem has entered a state roughly similar to that of a steady magnetospheric convection interval with strong
earthward ﬂows originating over a broad extent in local time of the BZ = 0 contour that is now located around
X = −25RE. Entry into a SMC-like state is typical for LFM simulations with steady solar wind driving conditions
and without ionospheric outﬂow [Wiltberger et al., 2010; Brambles et al., 2011]. As the animation shows the
transition to this conﬁguration is accompanied by several bursts of intense reconnection along BZ = 0 con-
tour. Interestingly, while there is a broad local time extent of high-speed earthward ﬂows, only a small number
of narrow ﬂow channels are seen approximately 5 RE earthward of this region.
3. Analysis of Bursty Bulk Flows
In this section we examine the ﬂows seen in the simulation in more detail and make comparisons to the prop-
erties of BBFs that have been seen in observations. We begin with a case study examination of ﬂow bursts
during the early portion of the simulation. We then move on to present the results of a superposed epoch
analysis of LFM simulation data using the selection criteria detailed in the Ohtani2004 analysis of Geotail
observations of BBFs.
3.1. Case Study
In order to more clearly understand the structure and origins of ﬂow bursts in the simulation, we are going to
focus our analysis on the ﬂows that are seen on the dawnside of the magnetotail between 04:55 and 05:10 ST.
Figure 2 shows two snapshots taken from a scientiﬁc visualization included in the supporting information for
the online version of this paper. This visualization displays the same data as Figure 1, but the area of empha-
sis has been zoomed in to include just the dawnside portion of the magnetotail, and the time range has
been limited to cover the passage of the high-speed ﬂow. In addition, there are six colored circles located at
Y = 7.5RE at every 5 RE in X between −20 and −45RE. Plasma and magnetic ﬁeld data are extracted from these
locations and plotted in Figure 3.
At the beginning of the scientiﬁc visualization a broad region of high-speed ﬂow is seen tailward ofX = −40RE,
and this has narrowed into a ﬂow burst that has the typical broad BZ enhancement at the leading edge. At
this time the leading edge of the BBF has propagated to approximately X = −15RE. The BBF of focus to our
case study can be seen surging into the red circle at 04:57:29 ST. While not shown in this paper examination
of the full magnetotail shows that this BBF originated in the distant tail near X = −75RE around 04:54 ST
and propagated earthward in nearly a straight-line path until its arrival at the red circle. From 04:57:29 ST
to 05:00:05 ST, the time of Figure 2a, the BBF continues to propagate earthward passing through the cyan,
green, and purple data extraction locations. In Figure 3a the narrow leading edge of the BBF is seen with
an enhancement in BZ ahead of ﬂow. The extent in Y of the BZ enhancement is broader than the region of
high ﬂow speeds by about a factor of 2, and it has a concave shape. Approximately 80 s later in Figure 2b
WILTBERGER ET AL.
HIGH-RES MHD BBF SIMULATION
4559
 21699402, 2015, 6, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/2015JA021080 by Rice University, Wiley Online Library on [17/02/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


---

<!-- Page 6 -->

Journal of Geophysical Research: Space Physics
10.1002/2015JA021080
Figure 2. Two frames from the scientiﬁc visualization zooming in on the magnetotail structure during the passage of a BBF around 05 ST. The same cut plane
coloring, vector ﬁeld, and BZ = 0 contour seen in Figure 1are used here. The six colored circles indicate extraction points used in the analysis of the ﬂow channel
properties. (a) The status of the BBF at 05:00 is seen. (b) The tail conﬁguration approximately 90 s later at 05:01:23 is displayed.
we see that the leading edge of ﬂow has nearly reached the orange circle 5 RE further earthward than the
purple circle. At this time indications of a turn toward the X axis are beginning to be evident. While we do
not fully understand what causes a BBF to change direction, we believe that it is related to changes in the
magnetic ﬁeld conﬁguration in the magnetotail. The conﬁguration changes from taillike with symmetry along
the Y axis to axisymmetric as the ﬂow propagates earthward, and therefore, magnetic curvature force tends
to push the ﬂows radially toward the Earth in the near-Earth region. This behavior is consistent with what is
seen in the simulations, although there are clearly small-scale variations in this behavior. Also, clearly present
are the vortical ﬂows along the sides of the ﬂow as seen in the Birn et al. [2004] MHD simulations of BBFs
Figure 3. Values of density, VX, and BZ at ﬁxed along the path of a BBF. (a–f) Values in 5 RE steps from X = −45 to
−20RE. In each panel density is plotted with the solid green line, VX is plotted with a solid red line, and BZ is plotted with
the solid blue line. The color coded on the X location labeling corresponds to the circle color in Figure 2. The plot covers
15 min during which time the BBF covers the entire range of X values shown in the plot.
WILTBERGER ET AL.
HIGH-RES MHD BBF SIMULATION
4560
 21699402, 2015, 6, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/2015JA021080 by Rice University, Wiley Online Library on [17/02/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


---

<!-- Page 7 -->

Journal of Geophysical Research: Space Physics
10.1002/2015JA021080
in the magnetotail. These vortical structures result in the generation of ﬁeld-aligned currents and probable
signatures of the BBF in the ionosphere. Earlier work using LFM-RCM, Pembroke et al. [2012] demonstrated a
direct connection between the BBFs and their ionospheric signatures at lower resolution, while Merkin et al.
[2013b] showed that FACs can form smaller-scale structures as the simulation resolution improves.
Before continuing to describe temporal evolution of the ﬂow structure in the magnetotail, we turn our atten-
tion to the plasma and magnetic ﬁeld data extracted from the simulation shown in Figure 3. Each panel in this
ﬁgure shows the BZ (blue), VX (red), and number density (green) proﬁle. The X location label in each panel is
color coded to match the circle colors in the scientiﬁc visualization associated with Figure 2. Figure 3a shows
the data from red circle at X = −45RE, and Figure 3f contains the data from the yellow circle at X = −20RE.
The ﬁrst clear signal of the BBF is seen in Figure 3b at approximately 04:56 ST. A small increase in the density
precedes the increase in BZ which in turn precedes the increase in VX. In Figures 3c–3e we see that the front
propagates earthward with the BZ proﬁle steepening and increasing in magnitude until it reaches a peak value
of 20 nT at X = −25RE. The BZ peak reaches this location at approximately 05:01:30 ST with the velocity peak
arriving approximately 1 min later. As the visualization shows after this time the BBF makes a turn earthward,
and so this BBF front is not seen in the X = −20RE data shown in Figure 3f.
Returning now to the evolution of the magnetotail during the last 10 min of our investigation interval,
Figure 2b shows an interesting development after the passage of the BBF at 05:01:23 ST. Along the BZ = 0
contour near the green circle the ﬂow pattern shows the onset of a new reconnection region with ﬂows
directed earthward of the contour on the earthward side and tailward of the contour on the tailward side.
These reconnection-driven ﬂows are ﬁrst apparent in the visualization at 05:00:44 ST after the core of the
BBF we had been previously focusing on passes the location of the green circle. At 05:02:21 ST in the simula-
tion a burst of ﬂow is seen propagating earthward and toward the X axis from the region of the green circle.
Approximately 2 RE closer to the X axis the ﬂow direction turns to become predominately earthward with a
component directed away from the X axis. The BBF proﬁle appears to just skim the purple circle with the char-
acteristic BBF feature of density and BZ increase preceding the VX increase. This is consistent with the previous
analysis of the orange circle data set between 05:04:00 and 05:05:00 ST shown in Figure 3e. This BBF is clearly
seen to propagate earthward with the yellow circle catching the edge of narrow ﬂow channel but clearly
detecting the enhanced BZ and density drop around 05:05 ST with increase in velocity following shortly after-
ward. We interpret this as the generation of an earthward propagating BBF by the onset of reconnection in
the midtail region.
In fact, this process happens again in the same region of the magnetotail a few minutes later. In this case a new
burst of reconnection happens earthward of the purple circle as can be seen in the 05:06:34 ST frame of the
scientiﬁc visualization. A third BBF signature is seen at the orange circle extraction location at approximately
05:07 ST. As the visualization shows the ﬂow path takes it dawnward of the yellow circle so it is not seen in
the data extracted from that location. However, in Figures 3a–3d a spike in tailward ﬂow propagating down
the magnetotail through the purple, green, blue, and even red circle extraction locations is clearly evident.
While not the main focus of this study, these tailward ﬂow bursts are seen in the Geotail data analyzed by
Ohtani2004.
Figure 3 also reveals a number of key points. The peak earthward plasma velocity in the region between
X=−25RE and X=−40RE is on the order of 1500 km/s. If sustained, such a ﬂow would travel the distance of
15 RE in ∼60 s. It is clear from the ﬁgure that it takes the structure much longer, ≈5 min. The phase speed of
the structure, e.g., measured by the motion of the peak of the magnetic ﬁeld between Figures 3b and 3e, is
≈15RE/5 min or ≈300 km/s. Therefore, the BBF structure travels as a wave perturbation through the back-
ground plasma. An interesting question then is where does the high-speed plasma go once produced by the
perturbation? In order to address this question, it is helpful to examine the structure of the magnetotail in
the XZ plane. Figure 4 is taken from the simulation at the same time as Figure 2b (05:01:32 ST). In addition to
the equatorial plane cut we have been using, an XZ plane at the location of the ﬂow channel (Y = −7.5RE)
is plotted. Both planes are colored with VX using a divergent blue/red color table. A series of white ﬁeld lines
are drawn from footprints near the location of the BBF at this time. It also contains a vector ﬁeld showing
the ﬂow into the reconnection region. With this ﬁgure we can now clearly see that ﬂow is diverted into the
ﬁeld-aligned direction similarly to the regional magnetotail simulation of a depleted ﬂux tube by Birn et al.
[2004]. This means that the region of strong perpendicular (to the main ﬁeld direction) ﬂow is localized near
the neutral sheet as illustrated by the BX = 0 isosurface in Figure 4. As a side note it is worth pointing out
WILTBERGER ET AL.
HIGH-RES MHD BBF SIMULATION
4561
 21699402, 2015, 6, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/2015JA021080 by Rice University, Wiley Online Library on [17/02/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


---

<!-- Page 8 -->

Journal of Geophysical Research: Space Physics
10.1002/2015JA021080
Figure 4. Values of VX in the equatorial plane and in the XZ plane located along the ﬂow extraction points in Figure 2
(Y = −7.5RE) at 05:00 ST are shown with divergent blue/red color table. A set of white ﬁeld lines near the location of the
BBF is plotted. The grey isosurfaces are drawn for values of BX = 0 providing an illustration of the warping of the current
sheet. The vector glyphs show plasma ﬂow direction and are shaded with magnitude of the ﬂow velocity.
that we see a depletion of the ﬂux tube entropy in the region of the ﬂow burst as seen by Birn et al. [2011]
and reported in the LFM-RCM simulations of Pembroke et al. [2012]. Another important point evident from
Figure 3 is that both plasma and ﬁeld compression in front of the high-speed ﬂow intensify as the structure
moves closer to the Earth. Since the dipole ﬁeld contribution is negligible (as is clear from the low BZ values
earthward of the BZ peak), this is not a pileup process caused by breaking of the ﬂow which can be important
much closer to the Earth [Shiokawa et al., 1997]. Instead, the ﬁeld and plasma appear to be piled up in front of
the high-speed ﬂow that compresses them as a piston.
3.2. Superposed Epoch Analysis
Using Geotail observations between October 1993 and July 2001, Ohtani2004 analyzed fast ﬂow events in
the magnetotail between −5RE and −31RE along the GSM X axis and within ±15RE GSM Y. For fast earthward
ﬂows they deﬁned the zero epoch time as the time when the V⟂X was below 200 km/s before it exceeded a
value of 300 km/s. They also required the ion beta, 𝛽i, to be greater than 0.5 in the 10 min prior to the zero
epoch time in order to ensure that the spacecraft was located within the plasma sheet during the observed
high-speed ﬂow. This data set contains 818 earthward ﬂow events. In order to construct a similar analysis of
the LFM simulation results, we begin by extracting data from the Z = 0RE and 1 RE planes every 5 RE in X
between −5 and −40RE with a 1 RE spacing in Y between ±15RE. Since the simulation contains no dipole tilt,
no 𝛽check is required to ensure that the data are from the simulated plasma sheet. The relatively ﬂat nature of
the BX = 0 isosurface in Figure 4 further supports this conclusion. The data are extracted from every dump ﬁle
in the simulation interval from 04:30 to 06:00 ST. No attempt is made to correlate observations between points
extracted from the LFM simulation. The SEA data set resulting from the LFM simulation contains 441 events
in the Z = 0 plane and 185 events in the Z = 1 plane. As a side note we point out that while the simulation
has no dipole tilt and purely southward IMF, the plasma sheet may not be completely symmetric about the
equator due to, for instance, the development of kink-type modes [Korovinskiy et al., 2013]. Furthermore, the
gradients in the Hall conductance arising from the day-night asymmetries present in the EUV conductance
and more importantly the auroral oval produced by the empirical electron precipitation model will lead to
breaking of dawn-dusk symmetry within the simulation.
Figure 5 shows a comparison between the SEA presented in Figure 3 of Ohtani2004 and the results of the LFM
simulation with Ohtani2004 results in Figures 5a, 5d, and 5g and the LFM results in Figures 5b, 5c, 5e, 5f, 5h, and
5i. Figures 5a–5c contain the velocity data, Figures 5d–5f contain the magnetic ﬁeld data, and Figures 5g–5i
contain the density data. It is important to point out that unlike the velocity and magnetic ﬁeld plots which
share the same extent for the Y axis, the Geotail data in Figure 5g have a much smaller Y axis range than the
LFM density data displayed in Figures 5h and 5i.
The Geotail data in Figure 5a show the perpendicular velocity rising rapidly in the minutes before the zero
epoch time reaching a peak velocity of ≈300 km/s after the zero epoch time and then returning within 5 min
to velocity values seen before the BBF event. The parallel velocity is slightly larger than the perpendicular
velocity before the event but only undergoes a very small increase during the BBF event. In the LFM data
WILTBERGER ET AL.
HIGH-RES MHD BBF SIMULATION
4562
 21699402, 2015, 6, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/2015JA021080 by Rice University, Wiley Online Library on [17/02/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


---

<!-- Page 9 -->

Journal of Geophysical Research: Space Physics
10.1002/2015JA021080
Figure 5. Comparison of the Ohtani2004 superposed epoch analysis of Geotail BBF data with results from a superposed epoch analysis using the same selection
criteria constructed from the high-resolution LFM simulations. (a, d, and g) Data taken from Figure 3 of Ohtani2004. (b, e, and h) Data from the LFM simulation at
the Z = 0.0 plane. (c, f, and i) Data from the Z = 1.0 plane of the simulation. Figures 5a–5c show the V⟂X and V∥comparisons. Figures 5d–5f compare the
magnetic ﬁeld properties between the data and observations. Figures 5g–5i compare the density changes. Note that in this last row unlike the previous rows,
the Geotail and LFM results are presented using diﬀerent y scales.
in the Z =0 and 1 RE planes the perpendicular velocity reaches a peak velocity comparable to that seen in
the Geotail results, but there are signiﬁcant diﬀerences in the temporal proﬁle. The velocity increase prior to
the zero epoch time is smaller, and the rise time to peak velocity is slightly longer in both planes. The most
signiﬁcant diﬀerence is in the time required to return to ﬂow speed to values seen before the BBF event. The
tail in the LFM velocity for the Z = 0RE data is signiﬁcantly longer. It returns to values seen before the BBF at
the end of the 10 min epoch window. Notably, the pulse width of the BBF in the Z = 1RE plane is narrower than
that in the Z = 0RE plane. The parallel velocity data in the LFM for the Z = 0RE plane are smaller than in the
Geotail observations and do not show much increase during the BBF passage except for a small increase that
peaks around the zero epoch time. For the Z = 1RE plane there is a small increase in the parallel component
of the velocity during the passage of BBF with values becoming comparable to the perpendicular velocity at
the end of the epoch time in good agreement with the Geotail observations.
Another noteworthy diﬀerence is in the rise proﬁles of VX in the Geotail and LFM SEAs. In the Geotail data set
the VX proﬁle begins to rise approximately 1 min before the zero epoch time while the LFM results do not
show much rise until after the zero epoch time. In both SEAs the proﬁle of BZ does not show much change
until the zero epoch time. In their analysis of THEMIS data for dipolarization fronts Runov et al. [2011] found
an increase in VX approximately 40 s prior to the rise of EY and suggested that this rise is due to the ions
interacting with the dipolarization front and being ejected earthward after half a gyration period. This results
in an enhancement of VX, the X component of the ﬁrst-order moment of the ion distribution function, prior
to the arrival of the dipolarization front, but this VX enhancement is not accompanied by any increase in EY.
This suggests that the VX proﬁle has a longer rise time than EY in the data. Since this is not included in MHD,
we see a simultaneous rise in VX and EY in the LFM simulation results.
Figures 5d–5f present the magnetic ﬁeld data from the Geotail and LFM SEA. For the X and Y components of
the magnetic ﬁeld the absolute value is plotted while the Z component is always positive during the epoch
interval. In the Geotail data the BZ ﬁeld starts to increase around the start of the fast ﬂow and results in a
more dipolar ﬁeld with BZ greater than before the passage. The |BX| decreases during the passage of the fast
ﬂow. Before the ﬂow passage BX is greater than BZ, indicating that spacecraft while in the plasma sheet is
not near its center. After the passage of the BBF both |BX| and BZ reach roughly the same level which the
authors interpret as a sign of plasma sheet expansion after the passage of the BBF. Once again, there is strong
qualitative agreement between the observations and the LFM results. TheBZ proﬁle of the LFM data at Z = 0RE
in Figure 5e and Z = 1RE data in Figure 5f shows a sharp rise at the onset of high-speed ﬂows. Like the Geotail
observations, it returns more rapidly to post BBF values than the velocity, but consistent with the longer fall
time for the LFM velocity results, this proﬁle is longer in the LFM SEA then in the Geotail SEA. The |BX| proﬁle
in the LFM shows a similar drop in magnitude during the passage of the BBF with that reduction larger in the
WILTBERGER ET AL.
HIGH-RES MHD BBF SIMULATION
4563
 21699402, 2015, 6, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/2015JA021080 by Rice University, Wiley Online Library on [17/02/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


---

<!-- Page 10 -->

Journal of Geophysical Research: Space Physics
10.1002/2015JA021080
Z = 1RE data. In the Z = 0RE data the |BX| and BZ proﬁles are the weaker ﬁeld strength seen in the LFM results,
whereas for the Z = 1RE data the proﬁles are comparable. For the data taken from the Z = 1RE plane we see
that the simulation results have a reduction in ratio of BZ∕|BX| after the passage of the BBF that is qualitatively
the same as the reduction seen in the Geotail results. In the Z = 0RE plane this ratio remains the same after
the BBF passage. We interpret this diﬀerence between the planes as supporting the conclusion Z = 0RE plane
is close to the center of the current sheet and does not, as expected, see the plasma sheet expansion and
that most of the data in the Geotail SEA are coming from points that are located away from the center of the
current sheet. Ohtani2004 interpret the small increase in |BY| seen in the Geotail as being indicative of ﬂux
ropes with a guide ﬁeld as reported by the observations of Slavin et al. [1995]. In the LFM analysis this increase
is missing. Previous work by Farr et al. [2008] has shown ﬂux rope structures in LFM simulations with realistic
solar wind drivers, so we suspect that the lack of this feature in the current results is due in part to the highly
symmetric solar wind driving conditions.
Figures 5g–5i show a comparison for the plasma density in the Geotail and LFM SEAs. It is important to once
again point out that the scale on the LFM SEA is larger than that of the Geotail SEA. In the Geotail observa-
tions a small decrease in density is seen after the passage of the BBF. In the LFM data a density decrease is
also seen at the time of BBF passage in both planes. Like the Geotail observations, the proﬁle of the density
reduction in the LFM data set is the sharpest of the three data sets. Unlike the observations, the decrease
in density is signiﬁcantly larger. Since the magnitude of the diﬀerence is roughly the same between both
planes, it does not support the conclusion that the diﬀerence between the simulation and observation is due
to the Geotail observation points being located closer to the edge of the plasma sheet and therefore having
a smaller reduction in plasma density. In our opinion, the largest contributing factor to the diﬀerence in pro-
ﬁles is the preconditioning of the magnetosphere obtained through the idealized interval of northward IMF
which regulates the level of density seen in the magnetotail in LFM simulations.
It is worth taking a moment to comment on the similarities and diﬀerences between the SEA and the BBF
structure seen in the case study. Since the case study extracted data from the Z = 0RE plane, we focus our
comparison with SEA from that plane. In both cases the density drop in density precedes the peak in BZ. The
BZ peak in turn precedes the peak in the ﬂow velocity. The time separation between the velocity peak and BZ
peak is greater than the delta between the density drop and BZ peak in both the SEA and case study analysis.
A major diﬀerence is seen in the amplitude of the changes. The most signiﬁcant diﬀerence is in the VX magni-
tude with the SEA having peak velocity around 300 km/s and the peak velocity in the case study being around
1000 km/s. A signiﬁcant source of this diﬀerence comes from the SEA averaging of BBFs occurring through-
out the magnetotail over the 90 min interval. The amplitude of the BZ peak increases as the BBF propagates
earthward. The magnitude of the density change also increases as the BBF moves earthward. The fact that the
SEA has lower amplitude is expected given that we are averaging over the entire magnetotail and making no
attempt to uniquely identify ﬂows within the SEA.
4. Summary and Future Directions
Using high-resolution LFM simulations under idealized solar wind conditions, we have examined the structure
and evolution of BBFs in the magnetotail and compared them with observations. We ﬁnd that BBFs occur
quite frequently under driving with steady southward IMF. These BBFs occur throughout the magnetotail and
can follow distorted paths through the plasma sheet. From the case study we are able to conclude that the
BBFs have an enhancement in density preceding an enhancement in BZ, both of which precede the peak in
VX. More importantly, by looking closely at these BBF signatures in the extracted data and ﬂow patterns in the
magnetotail, we are able to deduce that the BBFs are driven by the onset of new reconnection and its related
ﬂows. The question of what regulates when and where the reconnection activity occurs remains an important
unanswered question that will be the focus of future analysis eﬀorts.
In addition to the case study analysis, we conducted a superposed epoch analysis of the ﬂows seen in the
magnetotail during 90 min of sustained southward IMF in the solar wind. This analysis used the same selection
criteria as the Ohtain2004 analysis of Geotail observations. The velocity, magnetic ﬁeld, and density structures
are qualitatively similar to those seen in the observations. But the simulations have a much broader proﬁle in
the perpendicular velocity, which becomes narrower away from the center of the plasma sheet. The major dif-
ference in the density characteristics is the magnitude of the density drop after the BBF passage. We attribute
WILTBERGER ET AL.
HIGH-RES MHD BBF SIMULATION
4564
 21699402, 2015, 6, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/2015JA021080 by Rice University, Wiley Online Library on [17/02/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


---

<!-- Page 11 -->

Journal of Geophysical Research: Space Physics
10.1002/2015JA021080
a large portion of this diﬀerence to the process of selecting data from the center of LFM plasma sheet. The
magnetic ﬁeld signatures show quite similar diﬀerences, again attributed mainly to the selection process.
While this idealized simulation shows strong qualitative agreement with the observations and provides con-
vincing evidence that in the simulation BBFs are driven by bursts of reconnection, additional work remains
to be conducted. Analysis of how IMF direction and solar wind velocity aﬀect the occurrence frequency and
distribution of BBFs remains to be done. Lotko et al. [2014] used LFM simulations to illustrate the important
role ionospheric conductive plays in the distribution of reconnection in the magnetotail. Investigating how
conductivity impacts the BBFs through the regulation of reconnection is also a compelling area for further
research. Surveys over long durations with realistic solar wind conditions at multiple simulation resolutions
akin to those conducted by Guild et al. [2008] should also be carried out to ensure a more meaningful statisti-
cal comparison with the observations. The global simulations can also be used to conduct analysis between
the BBFs and their ionospheric signatures. Development of a version of the LFM with Hall term will allow
investigations into non-MHD eﬀects on the evolution and dynamics of BBFs.
References
Anderson, B. J., K. Takahashi, T. Kamei, and C. L. Waters (2002), Birkeland current system key parameters derived from Iridium observations:
Method and initial validation results, J. Geophys. Res., 107(A6), 1079, doi:10.1029/2001JA000080.
Angelopoulos, V. (2008), The THEMIS mission, Space Sci. Rev., 141(1), 5–34, doi:10.1007/s11214-008-9336-1.
Angelopoulos, V., W. Baumjohann, C. F. Kennel, F. V. Coronti, M. G. Kivelson, R. Pellat, R. J. Walker, H. Luehr, and G. Paschmann (1992), Bursty
bulk ﬂows in the inner central plasma sheet, J. Geophys. Res., 97, 4027–4039, doi:10.1029/91JA02701.
Angelopoulos, V., C. F. Kennel, F. V. Coroniti, R. Pellat, M. G. Kivelson, R. J. Walker, C. T. Russell, W. Baumjohann, W. C. Feldman, and J. T. Gosling
(1994), Statistical characteristics of bursty bulk ﬂow events, J. Geophys. Res., 99, 21,257–21,280, doi:10.1029/94JA01263.
Ashour-Abdalla, M., M. El Alaoui, M. L. Goldstein, M. Zhou, D. Schriver, R. Richard, R. Walker, M. G. Kivelson, and K. -J. Hwang (2011),
Observations and simulations of non-local acceleration of electrons in magnetotail magnetic reconnection events, Nat. Phys., 7,
360–365, doi:10.1038/nphys1903.
Balogh, A., et al. (2001), The Cluster magnetic ﬁeld investigation: Overview of in-ﬂight performance and initial results, Ann. Geophys.,
19(10–12), 1207–1217.
Birn, J., M. Hesse, and K. Schindler (1996), MHD simulations of magnetotail dynamics, J. Geophys. Res., 101, 12,939–12,954,
doi:10.1029/96JA00611.
Birn, J., J. Raeder, Y. L. Wang, and R. A. Wolf (2004), On the propagation of bubbles in the geomagnetic tail, Ann. Geophys., 22, 1773–1786.
Birn, J., R. Nakamura, E. V. Panov, and M. Hesse (2011), Bursty bulk ﬂows and dipolarization in MHD simulations of magnetotail reconnection,
J. Geophys. Res., 116, A01210, doi:10.1029/2010JA016083.
Brambles, O. J., W. Lotko, P. A. Damiano, B. Zhang, M. Wiltberger, and J. Lyon (2010), Eﬀects of causally driven cusp O+ outﬂow on the storm
time magnetosphere-ionosphere system using a multiﬂuid global simulation, J. Geophys. Res., 115, A00J04, doi:10.1029/2010JA015469.
Brambles, O. J., W. Lotko, B. Zhang, M. Wiltberger, J. Lyon, and R. J. Strangeway (2011), Magnetosphere sawtooth oscillations induced by
ionospheric outﬂow, Science, 332(6034), 1183–1186, doi:10.1126/science.1202869.
Claudepierre, S. G., S. R. Elkington, and M. Wiltberger (2008), Solar wind driving of magnetospheric ULF waves: Pulsations driven by velocity
shear at the magnetopause, J. Geophys. Res., 113, A05218, doi:10.1029/2007JA012890.
Dubyagin, S., V. Sergeev, S. Apatenkov, V. Angelopoulos, A. Runov, R. Nakamura, W. Baumjohann, J. Mcfadden, and D. Larson (2011),
Can ﬂow bursts penetrate into the inner magnetosphere?, Geophys. Res. Lett., 38, L08102, doi:10.1029/2011GL047016.
Dungey, J. W. (1963), Interactions of solar plasma with the geomagnetic ﬁeld, Planet. Space Sci., 10, 233–237,
doi:10.1016/0032-0633(63)90020-5.
Farr, N. L., D. N. Baker, and M. Wiltberger (2008), Complexities of a 3-D plasmoid ﬂux rope as shown by an MHD simulation, J. Geophys. Res.,
113, A12202, doi:10.1029/2008JA013328.
Ge, Y. S., J. Raeder, V. Angelopoulos, M. L. Gilson, and A. Runov (2011), Interaction of dipolarization fronts within multiple bursty bulk ﬂows
in global MHD simulations of a substorm on 27 February 2009, J. Geophys. Res., 116, A00I23, doi:10.1029/2010JA015758.
Glocer, A., G. Tóth, T. Gombosi, and D. Welling (2009), Modeling ionospheric outﬂows and their impact on the magnetosphere, initial results,
J. Geophys. Res., 114, A05216, doi:10.1029/2009JA014053.
Guild, T. B., H. E. Spence, E. L. Kepko, V. Merkin, J. G. Lyon, M. Wiltberger, and C. C. Goodrich (2008), Geotail and LFM comparisons of plasma
sheet climatology: 2. Flow variability, J. Geophys. Res., 113, A04217, doi:10.1029/2007JA012613.
Korovinskiy, D. B., A. Divin, N. V. Erkaev, V. V. Ivanova, I. B. Ivanov, V. S. Semenov, G. Lapenta, S. Markidis, H. K. Biernat, and M.
Zellinger (2013), MHD modeling of the double-gradient (kink) magnetic instability, J. Geophys. Res. Space. Physics, 118, 1146–1158,
doi:10.1002/jgra.50206.
Lopez, R. E., S. Hernandez, M. Wiltberger, J. Lyon, and C. Goodrich (2006), Initial results from the simulation of the Halloween 2003 storms,
Adv. Geosci., 2, 191–200.
Lotko, W., R. H. Smith, B. Zhang, J. E. Ouellette, O. J. Brambles, and J. G. Lyon (2014), Ionospheric control of magnetotail reconnection,
Science, 345(6193), 184–187, doi:10.1126/science.1252907.
Lyon, J. G., R. E. Lopez, C. C. Goodrich, M. Wiltberger, and K. Papadopoulos (1998), Simulation of the March 9, 1995, substorm: Auroral
brightening and the onset of lobe reconnection, Geophys. Res. Lett., 25(1), 3039–3042, doi:10.1029/98GL00662.
Lyon, J. G., J. A. Fedder, and C. M. Mobarry (2004), The Lyon-Fedder-Mobarry (LFM) global MHD magnetospheric simulation code, J. Atmos.
Sol. Terr. Phys., 66, 1333–1350, doi:10.1016/j.jastp.2004.03.020.
Merkin, V. G., and J. G. Lyon (2010), Eﬀects of the low-latitude ionospheric boundary condition on the global magnetosphere, J. Geophys.
Res., 115, A10202, doi:10.1029/2010JA015461.
Merkin, V. G., B. J. Anderson, J. G. Lyon, H. Korth, M. Wiltberger, and T. Motoba (2013a), Global evolution of Birkeland currents on 10 min
timescales: MHD simulations and observations, J. Geophys. Res. Space Physics, 118, 4977–4997, doi:10.1002/jgra.50466.
Merkin, V. G., J. G. Lyon, and S. G. Claudepierre (2013b), Kelvin-Helmholtz instability of the magnetospheric boundary in a three-dimensional
global MHD simulation during northward IMF conditions, J. Geophys. Res. Space Physics, 118, 5478–5496, doi:10.1002/jgra.50520.
Acknowledgments
This material is based upon work sup-
ported by NASA grants NNX13AE39G,
NNX13AF82G, NNX12AD31G, and
NNX13AF78G. The National Center for
Atmospheric Research is sponsored by
the National Science Foundation. All
model output, simulation codes, and
analysis routines are being preserved
on the NCAR High Performance Stor-
age System and will be made available
upon written request to the lead
author of this publication. The com-
putations were performed on Kraken
through an allocation of advanced
computing resources provided by the
Extreme Science and Engineering Dis-
covery Environment (XSEDE), which is
supported by NSF grant OCI-1053575.
Larry Kepko thanks Ilja Honkonen and
one anonymous reviewer for their
assistance in evaluating this paper.
WILTBERGER ET AL.
HIGH-RES MHD BBF SIMULATION
4565
 21699402, 2015, 6, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/2015JA021080 by Rice University, Wiley Online Library on [17/02/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


---

<!-- Page 12 -->

Journal of Geophysical Research: Space Physics
10.1002/2015JA021080
Nakamura, R., et al. (2004), Spatial scale of high-speed ﬂows in the plasma sheet observed by Cluster, Geophys. Res. Lett., 31, L09804,
doi:10.1029/2004GL019558.
Ohtani, S.-I., M. A. Shay, and T. Mukai (2004), Temporal structure of the fast convective ﬂow in the plasma sheet: Comparison between
observations and two-ﬂuid simulations, J. Geophys. Res., 109, A03210, doi:10.1029/2003JA010002.
Pembroke, A., F. Toﬀoletto, S. Sazykin, M. Wiltberger, J. Lyon, V. Merkin, and P. Schmitt (2012), Initial results from a dynamic coupled
magnetosphere-ionosphere-ring current model, J. Geophys. Res., 117, A02211, doi:10.1029/2011JA016979.
Pontius, D. H. J., and R. A. Wolf (1990), Transient ﬂux tubes in the terrestrial magnetosphere, Geophys. Res. Lett., 17(1), 49–52,
doi:10.1029/GL017i001p00049.
Pulkkinen, T. I., and M. Wiltberger (2000), Thin current sheet evolution as seen in observations, empirical models and MHD simulations,
Geophys. Res. Lett., 27(9), 1363–1366, doi:10.1029/1999GL003726.
Raeder, J., J. Berchem, M. Ashour-Abdalla, L. A. Frank, W. R. Paterson, K. L. Ackerson, S. Kokubun, T. Yamamoto, and J. A. Slavin (1997), Bound-
ary layer formation in the magnetotail: Geotail observations and comparisons with a global MHD simulation, Geophys. Res. Lett., 24,
951–954.
Raeder, J., D. Larson, W. Li, E. L. Kepko, and T. Fuller-Rowell (2008), OpenGGCM simulations for the THEMIS mission, Space Sci. Rev., 141(1),
535–555, doi:10.1007/s11214-008-9421-5.
Rème, H., et al. (2001), First multispacecraft ion measurements in and near the Earth’s magnetosphere with the identical Cluster ion
spectrometry (CIS) experiment, Ann. Geophys., 19(1), 1303–1354, doi:10.5194/angeo-19-1303-2001.
Runov, A., V. Angelopoulos, M. I. Sitnov, V. A. Sergeev, J. Bonnell, J. P. McFadden, D. Larson, K.-H. Glassmeier, and U. Auster (2009), THEMIS
observations of an earthward-propagating dipolarization front, Geophys. Res. Lett., 36, L14106, doi:10.1029/2009GL038980.
Runov, A., V. Angelopoulos, X.-Z. Zhou, X. J. Zhang, S. Li, F. Plaschke, and J. Bonnell (2011), A THEMIS multicase study of dipolarization fronts
in the magnetotail plasma sheet, J. Geophys. Res., 116, A05216, doi:10.1029/2010JA016316.
Shiokawa, K., W. Baumjohann, and G. Haerendel (1997), Braking of high-speed ﬂows in the near-Earth tail, Geophys. Res. Lett., 24(1),
1179–1182, doi:10.1029/97GL01062.
Sitnov, M. I., M. Swisdak, and A. V. Divin (2009), Dipolarization fronts as a signature of transient reconnection in the magnetotail, J. Geophys.
Res., 114, A02205, doi:10.1029/2008JA013980.
Slavin, J. A., C. J. Owen, M. M. Kuznetsova, and M. Hesse (1995), ISEE 3 observations of plasmoids with ﬂux rope magnetic topologies,
Geophys. Res. Lett., 22(1), 2061–2064, doi:10.1029/95GL01977.
Wiltberger, M., T. I. Pulkkinen, J. G. Lyon, and C. C. Goodrich (2000), MHD simulation of the magnetotail during the December 10, 1996,
substorm, J. Geophys. Res., 105, 27,649–27,664, doi:10.1029/1999JA000251.
Wiltberger, M., R. S. Weigel, W. Lotko, and J. A. Fedder (2009), Modeling seasonal variations of auroral particle precipitation in a global-scale
magnetosphere-ionosphere simulation, J. Geophys. Res., 114, A01204, doi:10.1029/2008JA013108.
Wiltberger, M., W. Lotko, J. G. Lyon, P. Damiano, and V. Merkin (2010), Inﬂuence of cusp O+ outﬂow on magnetotail dynamics in a multiﬂuid
MHD model of the magnetosphere, J. Geophys. Res., 115, A00J05, doi:10.1029/2010JA015579.
Wiltberger, M., L. Qian, C.-L. Huang, W. Wang, R. E. Lopez, A. G. Burns, S. C. Solomon, Y. Deng, and Y. Huang (2012), CMIT study of CR2060
and 2068 comparing L1 and MAS solar wind drivers, J. Atmos. Sol. Terr. Phys., 83, 39–50, doi:10.1016/j.jastp.2012.01.005.
WILTBERGER ET AL.
HIGH-RES MHD BBF SIMULATION
4566
 21699402, 2015, 6, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/2015JA021080 by Rice University, Wiley Online Library on [17/02/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
