<!-- Page 1 -->

JOURNAL OF GEOPHYSICAL RESEARCH: SPACE PHYSICS, VOL. 118, 4952–4962, doi:10.1002/jgra.50452, 2013
Rapid acceleration of protons upstream of earthward propagating
dipolarization fronts
A. Y. Ukhorskiy,1 M. I. Sitnov,1 V. G. Merkin,1 and A. V. Artemyev2
Received 31 October 2012; revised 27 June 2013; accepted 9 July 2013; published 12 August 2013.
[1]
Transport and acceleration of ions in the magnetotail largely occurs in the form of
discrete impulsive events associated with a steep increase of the tail magnetic ﬁeld
normal to the neutral plane (Bz), which are referred to as dipolarization fronts. The goal
of this paper is to investigate how protons initially located upstream of earthward moving
fronts are accelerated at their encounter. According to our analytical analysis and
simpliﬁed two-dimensional test-particle simulations of equatorially mirroring particles,
there are two regimes of proton acceleration: trapping and quasi-trapping, which are
realized depending on whether the front is preceded by a negative depletion in Bz. We
then use three-dimensional test-particle simulations to investigate how these acceleration
processes operate in a realistic magnetotail geometry. For this purpose we construct an
analytical model of the front which is superimposed onto the ambient ﬁeld of the
magnetotail. According to our numerical simulations, both trapping and quasi-trapping
can produce rapid acceleration of protons by more than an order of magnitude. In the case
of trapping, the acceleration levels depend on the amount of time particles stay in phase
with the front which is controlled by the magnetic ﬁeld curvature ahead of the front and
the front width. Quasi-trapping does not cause particle scattering out of the equatorial
plane. Energization levels in this case are limited by the number of encounters particles
have with the front before they get magnetized behind it.
Citation: Ukhorskiy, A. Y., M. I. Sitnov, V. G. Merkin, and A. V. Artemyev (2013), Rapid acceleration of protons upstream of
earthward propagating dipolarization fronts, J. Geophys. Res. Space Physics, 118, 4952–4962, doi:10.1002/jgra.50452.
1.
Introduction
[2] Much of plasma heating in the terrestrial magneto-
sphere takes place in the magnetotail, where the magnetic
energy brought with the solar wind is ﬁrst accumulated
and then suddenly released following magnetic reconnec-
tion [e.g., McPherron et al., 1973]. Magnetic energy is
transferred to kinetic energy of particles in the process of
magnetic ﬁeld dipolarizations which bring energized parti-
cles from the tail to the inner magnetosphere [e.g., Lui et al.,
1987; Brandt et al., 2001]. Subsequently, energized ions
become the dominant source of plasma pressure in the inner
magnetosphere. Hot plasma pressure drives large electric
currents which determine global electrodynamics and cou-
pling of the inner magnetosphere-ionosphere system [e.g.,
Roelof et al., 2004]. Pressure-driven currents can cause large
distortions of magnetic ﬁeld across the inner magnetosphere
1The Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory, Laurel,
Maryland, USA.
2Space Research Institute, RAS, Moscow, Russia.
Corresponding author: A. Y. Ukhorskiy, The Johns Hopkins Univer-
sity Applied Physics Laboratory, Laurel, MD 20723, USA. (aleksandr.
ukhorskiy@jhuapl.edu)
©2013. The Authors.
This is an open access article under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs License, which permits use and dis-
tribution in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, the
use is non-commercial and no modiﬁcations or adaptations are made.
2169-9380/13/10.1002/jgra.50452
leading to rapid magnetopause loss of relativistic electrons
from the outer radiation belts [e.g., Ukhorskiy et al., 2006].
Hot plasma also provides the energy source for multiple
instabilities generating wave modes that contribute to accel-
eration and loss of energetic ions and relativistic electrons
[e.g., Kennel and Petscheck, 1966; Thorne, 2010].
[3] According to in situ satellite measurements, transport
and energization of ions in Earth’s magnetotail largely
occurs in the form of discrete activations such as sub-
storms and bursty bulk ﬂows [Baumjohann et al., 1990;
Angelopoulos et al., 1992; Shiokawa et al., 1997, 1998;
Fairﬁeld et al., 1998, 1999]. Distinctive features of these
impulsive events are high-speed plasma ﬂow bursts with
strong and steep increases of the tail magnetic ﬁeld compo-
nent (Bz) normal to the neutral plane. Such abrupt magnetic
ﬁeld changes, which make the stretched tail ﬁeld more dipo-
lar, are often referred to as dipolarization fronts [Nakamura
et al., 2002; Runov et al., 2009, 2011, 2012].
[4] Dipolarization fronts are observed throughout the
magnetotail and deep inside the inner magnetosphere
(from X = –3.5 to & 31 RE) [e.g., Ohtani et al., 2004,
2006; Nosé et al., 2010; Runov et al., 2011]. The analy-
sis of 24 dipolarization fronts crossed by multiple THEMIS
spacecraft between X = –20 and –9 RE [Runov et al.,
2011] showed that the steep increase of Bz at the fronts
is preceded by a depletion with an amplitude of about a
factor of three smaller than the increase and followed by
a more gradual decrease of the ﬁeld. A typical extent of
4952


---

<!-- Page 2 -->

UKHORSKIY ET AL.: PROTON ACCELERATION AT DIPOLARIZATIONS
the entire structure along its propagation direction is from
2 to 3 RE. The front thickness (i.e., the distance from the
Bz minimum to maximum) is between 500 and 1000 km,
which is comparable to the gyroradius of thermal ions.
The earthward propagation speed varies between 300 and
600 km/s. Dipolarization fronts are localized in the dawn-
dusk direction. Studies based on comparisons between satel-
lite and ground-based data [e.g., Angelopoulos et al., 1997]
estimate the dawn-dusk extent to be 3–5 RE, whereas the
multipoint observation analysis give an estimate of 2–3 RE
[e.g., Nakamura et al., 2004]. Dipolarization fronts are also
localized to the narrow region around the magnetic equa-
tor. With the use of Cluster measurements, Nakamura et al.
[2004] estimated the north-south extent of the fronts to be no
wider than 1.5–2 RE.
[5] Dipolarization fronts are associated with dispersion-
less injections of hot tenuous plasmas [e.g., Runov et al.,
2009]. Overall, macroscopic properties of dipolarization
fronts are consistent with the concept of plasma bubbles,
i.e., entropy depleted ﬂux tubes which are propelled
earthward due to interchange instability [e.g., Rosenbluth
and Longmire, 1957; Pontius and Wolf, 1990; Chen and
Wolf, 1993; Birn et al., 2011].
[6] A number of studies have been conducted to under-
stand the mechanisms of plasma heating at dipolarization
fronts at microscopic (i.e., individual particle) level as well
as to investigate the sources of accelerated particles [e.g.,
Delcourt and Sauvaud, 1994; Sarris et al., 2002; Li et al.,
2003; Zaharia et al., 2004; Elkington et al., 2005; Ashour-
Abdalla et al., 2010; Zhou et al., 2011a]. In particular,
Birn and Hesse [1994] and Birn et al., [1997, 2000, 2012]
conducted a series of test-particle simulations of proton
dynamics in three-dimensional time-dependent electric and
magnetic ﬁelds of MHD simulations of dipolarizations trig-
gered by magnetotail reconnection. Dipolarizations in the
model have positive increase in Bz similar to observed dipo-
larization fronts and therefore have strong positive Ey due to
their rapid earthward propagation. Protons were traced back-
ward in time from selected locations in phase space till they
either reach the simulation boundary or desired initial state.
According to their results, some protons initially located
in the dawn plasma sheet behind dipolarization site can
intercept it and drift into its strong Ey region from the dawn
ﬂank close to the magnetic equator. While inside the dipo-
larization region, protons exhibit gyration in the increased
magnetic ﬁeld and are accelerated by positive Ey on the por-
tion of their gyro-orbit along the +y direction and decelerated
on the portion of the orbit along the –y direction. For some
particles, the energy gain can signiﬁcantly exceed the energy
loss, and by the time they drift out of the dipolarization site,
they can get accelerated by almost two orders of magnitude.
[7] In a series of publications, Zhou et al. [2010, 2011b]
analyzed interaction of dipolarization fronts with protons
initially located earthward of the fronts. Perturbations in
the magnetic and electric ﬁelds due to the fronts were rep-
resented by one-dimensional analytical functions Bz(x, t)
and Ey(x, t), which were superimposed onto equilibrium
plasma sheet from the generalized Harris [1962] model.
Their test particle experiments successfully reproduced char-
acteristic features of energetic ion precursors observed by
THEMIS spacecraft prior to dipolarization fronts. The pre-
dominantly earthward direction of the energized ion ﬂows
was interpreted as the indication that particles are energized
by specular reﬂection from the fronts, similar to particle
reﬂection from quasi-perpendicular shocks [e.g., Terasawa,
1979; Gosling et al., 1982]. At the encounter with a front,
ions are turned around due to the sharp and strong increase in
Bz behind the front. Ions are reﬂected earthward at  2u–vx,
where vx is the x component of particle velocity prior to the
reﬂection and u is the earthward velocity of the front. For
instance, particles initially with vx ' –u can gain a factor of
8 increase in energy.
[8] Recently, Artemyev et al. [2012] considered implica-
tions of negative magnetic ﬁeld depletions ahead of dipolar-
ization fronts, i.e., when the depletions are strong enough to
cause magnetic reconnection. In this case, resonant protons,
whose earthward velocities are close to the velocity of the
front, can be stably trapped at the reconnection point. For
as long as particles are trapped, they are linearly accelerated
in the –y direction by the electric ﬁeld associated with the
front motion. This mechanism similar to the surfatron accel-
eration [e.g., Sagdeev, 1966; Katsouleas and Dawson, 1983]
has been actively explored in space plasmas in the context of
particle acceleration by shock waves [e.g., Takeuchi, 2005].
With the use of analytical estimates and two-dimensional
test-particle simulations, Artemyev et al. [2012] showed
that protons trapped at dipolarization fronts can be rapidly
accelerated by more than two orders of magnitude.
[9] All dipolarization events between X = –20 and –9 RE
analyzed by Runov et al. [2011] produced ion heating. At
the same time, when computed in the minimal variance
coordinate system, the median value of the magnetic ﬁeld
depletions ahead of the fronts drops down to small values
but remains positive. It is therefore important to under-
stand whether the magnetic ﬁeld depletion ahead of the front
can contribute to ion energization in the absence of stable
trapping enabled by magnetic reconnection. Moreover, due
to the coupling of their gyromotion and bounce motion,
energetic (> keV) protons in magnetotail exhibit complex
quasi-adiabatic motion even in the absence of any transient
structures such as dipolarization fronts [e.g., Büchner and
Zelenyi, 1989; Chen, 1992]. Protons initially bouncing at
the equator get eventually scattered to small pitch angles,
which can lead to untrapping of particles moving with
the front and limit possible energization. Therefore, while
two-dimensional models are useful for elucidating phys-
ical mechanisms of particle acceleration at dipolarization
fronts, a quantitative analysis of ion energization requires
computation of three-dimensional particle orbits in realistic
magnetotail conﬁgurations.
[10] In this paper we conduct a systematic analysis of pro-
ton energization at dipolarization fronts for the case when
protons are initially located earthward of the fronts. We start
with the analysis of equatorially mirroring protons. In the
following section, we derive and discuss analytical solu-
tion of particle dynamics in the presence of an arbitrary
soliton-like dipolarization front. Section 3 describes our ana-
lytical model of dipolarization fronts, which is used in all
subsequent numerical simulations. In section 4, we discuss
idealized test-particle simulations of equatorially mirroring
particles interacting with earthward moving fronts. Section 5
followed by conclusions describes the results of full three-
dimensional simulations of rapid proton energization at
dipolarization fronts.
4953
 21699402, 2013, 8, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/jgra.50452 by Rice University, Wiley Online Library on [03/01/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


---

<!-- Page 3 -->

UKHORSKIY ET AL.: PROTON ACCELERATION AT DIPOLARIZATIONS
(b)
(a)
Figure 1.
A schematic illustration of particle interaction with dipolarization fronts with and without a
negative depletion in Bz ahead of the front. Blue arrows indicate the direction of the v  B force along the
 axis, the direction of dominant acceleration along y is shown by dots and crosses. (a) Particles can be
stably trapped at the reconnection point where they are accelerated in the –y direction by the electric ﬁeld
produced by the Lorentz transformation of the background magnetic ﬁeld. (b) In the absence of negative
Bz, particles can be quasi-trapped at the front being accelerated both behind and ahead of the front.
2.
Exact Solution for Equatorial Particles
[11] Everywhere in this paper we assume that the fronts
are solitary electromagnetic waves [e.g., Sagdeev, 1966].
The formation of soliton-like dipolarization fronts in the pro-
cess of magnetic reconnection onset in the magnetotail has
recently been shown in particle-in-cell simulations [Sitnov
et al., 2013]. This assumption implies that the front shape
does not considerably change on the time scales of particle
interaction with the fronts. It means that the only electric
ﬁeld associated with the front (in the laboratory frame) is
produced by the front motion, E = –u  B1/c, where B1 is
the magnetic ﬁeld of the front, and u = Oxu is its velocity,
which we assume to be directed to Earth. If we also assume
that neither the ambient magnetic ﬁeld (B0) nor the ﬁeld of
the front (B1) depend on y, the direction perpendicular to
the front propagation, then the total magnetic ﬁeld acting on
equatorially mirroring particles can be written as follows:
Bz(x, t) = B0 + B1(x – ut),
(1)
The equations of motion of an equatorially mirroring non-
relativistic proton are
(
mPvx = e
c(B0 + B1(x – ut))vy
mPvy = e
cB1(x – ut)u – e
c(B0 + B1(x – ut))vx,
(2)
where e is the proton charge, m is the mass, and c is the speed
of light. The electric ﬁeld of the front contributes only to the
second equation of the system (ﬁrst term on the right hand
side).
[12] After making a transformation into the reference
frame moving with the front,
 = x – ut, P = vx – u,
(3)
the equations of proton motion transform to the following:
8
<
:
R =
e
mc(B0 + B1())vy
Pvy = – e
mc
h
B0u + (B0 + B1())P
i
.
(4)
In the frame of the moving front, the electric ﬁeld of the
front itself is zero, whereas the ﬁrst term on the right hand
side of the second equation in system (4) is due to a constant
electric ﬁeld produced by the Lorenz transformation of the
background magnetic ﬁeld.
[13] In the case of an arbitrary proﬁle of the dipolarization
B1(), the second equation of (4) can be integrated over t.
After inserting the result in the ﬁrst equation of the system,
it can be written as
R = – @
@ U(, 0, t),
(5)
where
U(, 0, t) =
 e
mc
2
(utB0F(, 0) + 1
2F(, 0)2),
(6)
F(, 0) = B0( – 0) + A1() – A1(0).
(7)
In the above expression, A1() is the vector potential of the
front: B1 = dA1/d.
[14] According to expressions
(5)–(7), particle motion
across the front is described by the Hamiltonian:
H(, 0, t) =
P2
2 + U(, 0, t)
(8)
with the effective potential U, which depends on time and
particle initial position 0.
[15] The derived expression is valid for any one-
dimensional soliton-like front. However, the mechanisms
of particle acceleration are different at the fronts with and
without a negative Bz depletion. Before proceeding with a
quantitative analysis of how the shape of the effective poten-
tial and particle acceleration differ in these two cases, let
us elucidate key differences in particle dynamics. In the
case when a front is preceded by a negative depletion in
Bz (Figure 1a), the magnetic ﬁeld goes through zero in two
points across the front. In the vicinities of neutral (Bz = 0)
points, the last term in the second equation of (4) is neg-
ligible, and particles exhibit linear acceleration in the –y
direction. The acceleration process is maintained as long as
the particles stay at these points. Whether or not particles can
be trapped at a neutral point is determined by the magnetic
ﬁeld derivative, dBz/d, at this point. Particles are pushed
out (by the v  B force) from the neutral point closest to
the front, preventing trapping, while being attracted to the
second (magnetic reconnection) point, enabling trapping and
constant acceleration in the –y direction.
[16] Stable trapping is not possible in the absence of mag-
netic reconnection (Figure 1b). Nonetheless, ahead of the
front, the magnetic ﬁeld is weak and the –uB0 term in the
second equation of (4) dominates, which causes particle
4954
 21699402, 2013, 8, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/jgra.50452 by Rice University, Wiley Online Library on [03/01/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


---

<!-- Page 4 -->

UKHORSKIY ET AL.: PROTON ACCELERATION AT DIPOLARIZATIONS
Table 1. Parameters of the Dipolarization Front Model
Bm, nT
Bp, nT
m, RE
˛m
˛p
Lz, RE
X, nT  RE
20.0
–6.0
–0.1
2.5
1.0
0.2
2.0
acceleration in the –y direction. At the same time particles
are pushed into the front by the increasing Lorentz force
in the ﬁrst equation. When particles penetrate behind the
front where the B1 is large, the magnetic term B1 P becomes
dominant in the second equation. Consequently, particles
are turned around and are ejected back into the region of
depleted magnetic ﬁeld where they resume acceleration in
the –y direction. We refer to this acceleration regime as
quasi-trapping.
3.
Analytical Model of Dipolarization Fronts
[17] To understand the details of proton acceleration
ahead of earthward moving dipolarization fronts, we set
up controlled numerical experiments where the parameters
of the background magnetic ﬁeld and the electromagnetic
ﬁeld of the front can be adjusted to resemble the observed
parameters of dipolarizations in the magnetotail. In the
description of dipolarization fronts, we reproduce the fol-
lowing observational characteristics discussed in the intro-
duction: (1) front width; (2) front thickness; (3) increase in
Bz preceded by a depletion; and (4) localization in the north-
south direction. For this purpose we use a vector potential
function of the following analytical form:
A1(, z) = OyX()Z(z),
(9)
the corresponding magnetic ﬁeld is then given by
B1(, z) = –OxX()Z0(z) + OzX0()Z(z).
(10)
To investigate theoretical limits of proton acceleration, the
front is kept unbounded in the dawn-dusk direction.
[18]
The ion tearing eigenmode [Pritchett et al., 1991;
Sitnov and Swisdak, 2011] was used as the localization
function Z(z):
Z(z) =
1
p
cosh(z/LZ)
,
(11)
with Lz = 0.2 RE.
[19]
To describe the dependence of the front shape on the
direction of its propagation, we use a smooth function X()
composed of four pieces:
X =
8
ˆˆˆ<
ˆˆˆ:
B1(e˛m(–1) – 1)/˛m
+X(1) if  < 1
Bm(cos(km) – 1)/km
+X(0) if 1   < 0
Bp(cos(kp2) – cos(kp))/kp +X(2) if 0   < 2
B2e–˛p(–2)/˛p
+X
if  > 2
,
(12)
where at  = 0 the z component of the front magnetic ﬁeld
goes through zero: B1z = X0 = 0. The maximum Bm > 0
and the minimum Bp < 0 ﬁeld values are attained at m < 0
behind and p > 0 ahead of the front, which are related as
p = mBp/Bm to ensure that X0(0) is smooth. The reversed
length scales are set as follows: km,p = /2|m,p|. Points
1 < m and 2 > p are chosen such that the derivatives
X0(1,2) there are smooth:
1,2 = m,p 
1
km,p
arctan ˛m,p
km,p
(13)
and equal to B1,2 = Bm,p sin(km,p1,2). Constants ˛m,p set the
exponential decay of B1z() behind and the recovery ahead of
the front which determine the dipolarization extent along .
[20] The numerical values of independent parameters,
which were used in expressions (11)–(13) to deﬁne the front
are listed in Table 1. To describe the ambient magnetic ﬁeld
of the magnetotail, we used the T96 magnetic ﬁeld model
[Tsyganenko, 1995, 2002] at Pdyn = 4 nPa, Bz = 5 nT,
By = 0, Dst = 0, and zero tilt angle such that the z = 0 plane
corresponds to the magnetic equator. The T96 model under-
estimates the magnetic ﬁeld curvature in the tail, which is
compensated by the parameter X in expression (12). The
radius of curvature is calculated as  = 1/, where  = Obr Ob
and Ob is the unit vector along the magnetic ﬁeld. The X
value is chosen such that  estimated at x = –16 RE ahead
of the front is equal to 0.25 RE which falls into the statistical
range of the current sheet curvature values 500–10,000 km
as reported by Runov et al. [2005]. The contour plots of the
magnetic ﬁeld components of the described dipolarization
front are shown in Figure 2.
4.
2-D Analysis
[21] Depending on the value of the ambient magnetic
ﬁeld, the Bz depletion of a dipolarization front may or may
not cause reconnection ahead of the front. Both cases are
illustrated in Figure 3 showing the superposition of the front
described in previous section with the T96 magnetic ﬁeld at
different locations in the tail. Figure 3a corresponds to the
front at x = –16 RE. The ambient magnetic ﬁeld there is
B0 = 3.35 nT and the front is therefore preceded by a region
of negative Bz bounded by two neutral points. The bottom
part of Figure 3a shows magnetic ﬁeld lines in the meridional
plane. The reconnecting ﬁeld line is marked in red. Similarly,
Figure 3b shows the front at x = –12 RE where the ambi-
ent magnetic ﬁeld of B0 = 6.28 nT exceeds the magnitude of
Figure 2.
Longitudinal distributions of the magnetic ﬁeld
components in our dipolarization front model.
4955
 21699402, 2013, 8, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/jgra.50452 by Rice University, Wiley Online Library on [03/01/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


---

<!-- Page 5 -->

UKHORSKIY ET AL.: PROTON ACCELERATION AT DIPOLARIZATIONS
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.
Equatorial proﬁles of total magnetic ﬁeld and ﬁeld lines of model dipolarization front at two
locations in the magnetotail where the ambient magnetic ﬁeld is (a) weaker and (b) stronger than the
negative depletion of the ﬁeld associated with the front. The reconnecting line in Figure 3a is shown
in red.
the negative dip ahead of the front. Consequently, the front
in this case depletes the ﬁeld but does not cause reconnec-
tion. Before conducting full three-dimensional simulations,
we analyze proton dynamics in these two cases in two
dimensions restricting our consideration to the equatorially
mirroring particles.
[22] The effective potential of particle motion across the
front (expressions (6) and (7)) computed at three different
moments of time for both cases is shown in Figure 4.
Figure 4a corresponds to the case with a negative Bz ahead
of the front. The potential in this case was calculated for the
initial position 0 = 0.61 RE corresponding to the recon-
nection point ahead of the front. Red vertical lines indicate
neutral points. The potential in this case has a local maxi-
mum at the ﬁrst neutral point and a local minimum at the
reconnection point forming a potential well which narrows
with time. It can therefore be expected that the protons can
be stably trapped ahead of the front exhibiting oscillations in
 with diminishing amplitude.
[23] The effective potential in the case without a negative
Bz ahead of the front is illustrated in Figure 4b for the ini-
tial position 0 = 0.1 RE. The potential in this case does
not have a local maximum at the front. Consequently, parti-
cles cannot be trapped ahead of the front. After penetrating
behind the front, particles are turned around at the left wall
of the potential and return to the region of depleted magnetic
ﬁeld ahead of the front. With time, the left wall of the effec-
tive potential shifts toward negative values of , suggesting
that with each oscillation in , particles fall father and father
behind the front. It has to be noted though that when particles
separate sufﬁciently far from the front, their trajectory may
no longer be bounded by the walls of the effective poten-
tial (6) derived in the reference frame moving with the front.
Therefore, in the case of quasi-trapping, the time-dependent
effective potential (6) provides a useful insight into particle
motion only at initial stages when particles are conﬁned to
the front.
[24] Figure 5 shows phase portraits of proton motion for
both cases computed by numerically integrating equation (4)
with the earthward front speed of u = 600 km/s. Initial
positions are marked with red dots. Particles had the initial
energy of 2 keV. Proton energy along the orbits is marked
with color. In the ﬁrst case of a negative Bz depletion ahead
of the front (Figure 5a), the particle was launched earthward
(vx ' 619 km/s) from the reconnection point 0 = 0.61 RE,
i.e., very close to the resonance with the front. As was sug-
gested in the above consideration of the effective potential
functions, the particle was stably trapped ahead of the front.
It was localized within   0.02 RE of the front and
exhibited small oscillation in velocity P  70 km/s. Over
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.
The effective potential of particle motion along dipolarization fronts (a) with and (b) without
a negative depletion of Bz computed at different moments of time. Red vertical lines in Figure4a indicate
neutral points.
4956
 21699402, 2013, 8, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/jgra.50452 by Rice University, Wiley Online Library on [03/01/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


---

<!-- Page 6 -->

UKHORSKIY ET AL.: PROTON ACCELERATION AT DIPOLARIZATIONS
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.
Phase portraits of equatorially mirroring protons interacting with dipolarization fronts (a) with
and (b) without negative depletion of Bz. Particle initial positions are shown with red dots. Kinetic energy
along particle orbits is indicated with color.
500 s of the simulation process particle energy increased up
to almost 5  104 keV in accordance with linear acceler-
ation in the –y direction by the –B0u term in the second
equation of system (4) attributed to the Lorentz transforma-
tion of the ambient magnetic ﬁeld. The unrealistically high
energy gain is attributed to the idealized character of the sim-
ulation setup, i.e., an inﬁnitely wide dipolarization front and
a homogeneous background magnetic ﬁeld.
[25] As was mentioned in the introduction, the surfatron
acceleration was extensively discussed in the context of ion
acceleration at quasi-perpendicular shocks. In the case of
kinetic shocks, the difference in electron and ion inertia
results in an ambipolar electrostatic ﬁeld across the shock
front [e.g., Hoshino, 2001; Shapiro and Ücer, 2003]. The
localized electrostatic potential well enables stable trapping
of ions ahead of the front and subsequent shock surﬁng
acceleration similar to the surfatron acceleration of stably
trapped ions at dipolarization fronts preceded by negative
Bz. However, unlike the acceleration at dipolarization fronts,
which (under idealized conditions) is limited only by the sys-
tem size, the maximum energy of ions in shock surﬁng is
determined by the trapping limit deﬁned by balance between
the electric and the magnetic components of the Lorenz force
across the front: vy,max  cEx/Bz.
[26] The trajectory in Figure 5b is an example of quasi-
trapping in the case without a negative depletion in Bz ahead
of the front. The particle was launched from 0 = 0.1 RE
in anti-earthward direction, i.e., toward the front. Conse-
quently, the particle penetrates behind the front where it is
turned around by the strong Bz and is accelerated by the elec-
tric ﬁeld associated with the front motion. After the particle
is ejected back into the region of weak magnetic ﬁeld ahead
of the front, it turns into –y direction and is further acceler-
ated by the electric ﬁeld ahead of the front until it encounters
the front. The particle does not overtake the front for the sec-
ond time. It falls farther and farther behind the front with
each gyration experiencing the diminishing inﬂuence of the
front electric ﬁeld Ey = uB1/c > 0. The electric ﬁeld ampli-
tude on –y leg of its gyro-orbit is larger than on the +y leg.
Consequently, by the time the particle is completely sepa-
rated from the front, it looses more than 50% of the energy
it acquired during quasi-trapping.
[27] Quasi-trapping can be best illustrated by approxi-
mating the dipolarization front with two-step functions with
B( < 0) = B1  B0 behind the front and B( > 0) =
–B2 < 0 ahead of the front such that B2 . B0. Particle trajec-
tory at the quasi-trapping stage is schematically illustrated in
Figures 6a–6c in three different reference frames along with
(b)
(a)
(c)
(d)
Figure 6.
A schematic illustration of a quasi-trapped particle trajectory in different reference frames
along with electric and magnetic ﬁelds acting on the particle in these frames. (a) The laboratory frame;
(b) The reference frame moving with the dipolarization front; (c) The reference frames where the electric
ﬁeld behind the front and ahead of the front are zero. (d) The portion of particle trajectory behind the
front in the reference frame where the electric ﬁeld is zero.
4957
 21699402, 2013, 8, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/jgra.50452 by Rice University, Wiley Online Library on [03/01/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


---

<!-- Page 7 -->

UKHORSKIY ET AL.: PROTON ACCELERATION AT DIPOLARIZATIONS
(a)
(b)
Figure 7.
3-D test-particle simulation of proton dynamics at x0 = –16 RE where the front is preceded by
a negative Bz depletion. (a) Final kinetic energy of protons as function of their initial gyrophase. (b) The
effective electric ﬁeld Ee
y as a function of maximum particle displacement in the –y direction.
the electric and magnetic ﬁelds acting on the particle in these
frames. Figure 6b corresponds to the reference frame mov-
ing with the front. The presence of constant electric ﬁeld,
Ey = –uB0/c, in this frame makes it problematic to apply the
concept of specular reﬂection for estimating the change in
particle velocity (energy) after its escape out of the front.
[28] In the laboratory frame (Figure 6a), the electric ﬁeld
is constant both behind and ahead of the front. It is there-
fore possible to consider particle motion behind and ahead
of the front separately in two different reference frames
where the electric ﬁeld is zero and particle orbits are circular
(Figure 6c). Behind the front E = 0 in the frame, x0 = x–uE1t,
where uE1 = uB1/(B0+B1) (Figure 6d). The front in this frame
is moving in the +x0 direction with velocity u – uE1. Conse-
quently, not all particles that encounter the front will be able
to escape out of it. Indeed, proton gyration behind the front
is given by: (x0, y) = 0(– sin '0, cos '0), where 0 is the Lar-
mor radius. If a proton encounters the front at '0, then it will
overtake it and escape out, only if the time it takes for the
proton to complete its gyro-orbit, '0/!0, is less than the
time it take the front to pass the distance  = 0(1 – cos '0)
(see Figure 6d). Thus, we obtain the condition for particle
escape out of the front:
v0
u

1 + B0
B1

>
'0
1 – cos '0 ,
(14)
where v0 = [(vx – uE1)2 + v2
y]1/2 is the magnitude of particle
velocity in the moving frame, and '0 = arctan(vy/(vx –uE1))+
/2.
[29] Taking into account that the proton escape point will
lie on its gyro-orbit somewhere between points 1 and 2 indi-
cated in Figure 6d, which correspond to Q'0 = 0 (the last
point before the particle gets trapped) and Q'0 = 2 – '0 (the
limit when the front does not move), we obtain the following
estimate for the change in proton energy at the escape point:
K1 = ~ mu2
2

B1
B1 + B0
2 
1 – B1 + B0
B1
vx
u

,
(15)
where the factor ~ 2 (2, 4). According to estimate (15),
the gain in kinetic energy at the escape point is generally
less than what is expected from specular reﬂection, which
corresponds to the limit ~ = 4 and B1  B0.
[30] Ahead of the front E = 0 in the frame: x00 = x + uE2t,
where uE2 = uB2/(B0 – B2). Since the front velocity u + uE2 in
this frame is in the +x00 direction and all protons ahead of the
front are eventually turned in –x00 direction by the depleted
magnetic ﬁeld B0 – B2 > 0, any proton initially ahead of
the front will encounter it at some point of its gyro-orbit.
At given values of energy and pitch angle, the exact loca-
tion of the encounter point can be found only numerically.
To get an estimate of a characteristic proton energy change,
we assume the encounter to be at the point where the particle
turns toward the front: Qv00
x = 0, Qv00
y = v00, where v00 is the mag-
nitude of the initial velocity ahead of the front. As a result,
the change in proton kinetic energy ahead of the front can be
estimated as:
K2  mu2

B2
B0 – B2
2 
1 – B0 – B2
B2
vx
u

.
(16)
After taking into account that B0 – B2 is small, we obtain
K2  mu2B2/(B0 – B2)2  mu2/2.
[31] According to the above estimates, proton energy gain
ahead of the front can surpass the energy gain behind the
front. Also, with the use of expression (14), it can be
shown numerically that for realistic parameters of the front
and initial energies, protons cannot exhibit more than two
encounters with the front. After the second encounter, parti-
cles are overtaken by the front and lose most of the kinetic
energy gained during quasi-trapping.
5.
3-D Analysis
[32] To determine whether the additional complexity
introduced by three-dimensional particle motion in the
magnetotail modiﬁes the properties of trapping and quasi-
trapping acceleration of equatorially mirroring protons, we
conducted two numerical simulations. In both simulations
we used our analytical model of the front with the constant
4958
 21699402, 2013, 8, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/jgra.50452 by Rice University, Wiley Online Library on [03/01/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


---

<!-- Page 8 -->

UKHORSKIY ET AL.: PROTON ACCELERATION AT DIPOLARIZATIONS
Figure 8.
Examples of two different types of proton trajec-
tories in the case when the front is preceded by a negative Bz
depletion. Particle energy is indicated with color.
earthward propagation speed of 600 km/s superimposed
onto the T96 magnetic ﬁeld model. Ensembles of 3  104
protons evenly distributed in gyrophase between 0 and 2
were launched at two different radial distances in the mid-
night meridian of the equatorial plane (y0 = z0 = 0) with the
initial energy of 2 keV and 90ı pitch angle.
[33] In the ﬁrst simulation, protons were initiated at x0 =
–16 RE and the front was launched from x = –16.61 RE, such
that particles were initially located at the reconnection point
ahead of the front, where according to our two-dimensional
analysis they can be stably trapped. Figure 8a shows dis-
tribution of ﬁnal proton energy computed as a function of
the initial gyrophase ( 0). There are two groups of parti-
cles in the distribution. Particles with the initial gyrophase
around  (i.e., those initially moving in the direction oppo-
site to the front) penetrate into the region of the increased
magnetic ﬁeld behind the front deeper than their gyroradius.
These particles get magnetized behind the front and E  B
drift toward Earth. They fall behind the front due to the dif-
ference between the front velocity u and the velocity of their
E  B motion, uE ' uB1/(B0 + B1), until the electric ﬁeld
at their location diminishes such that the gradient-curvature
drift becomes prevalent at which point they separate from
the front. These particles exhibit no or weak acceleration.
[34] The second larger group of particles (63%) exhibit
substantial acceleration by more than 40 keV. This accelera-
tion is associated with trapping. To verify this, we computed
the effective electric ﬁeld accelerating particles in the –y
direction using the minimal values of particle displacement
y (the span of the acceleration region along the front)
and energy: Ee
y = K/ey. The distribution of the effec-
tive ﬁeld values as a function of y is shown in Figure 7b.
The average value hEe
yi = –2.10 mV/m of the effective ﬁeld
is very close to Ey = –uB0/c = 2.01 mV/m, the electric
ﬁeld in the frame moving with the front, which accelerates
trapped particles.
[35] As follows from Figure 7b, protons energized by
40 keV and more are displaced in the –y direction across the
front by at least 3 RE. However, despite the fact that the front
width in this simulation is not restricted, the displacement
in –y has the upper boundary of –6 RE. This is attributed
to the fact that particle orbits in the vicinity of the equato-
rial plane become unstable when particle gyroradius exceeds
the radius of the magnetic ﬁeld curvature [e.g., Chen and
Palmadesso, 1986]. After protons are accelerated to a certain
energy, they are pitch-angle scattered off the equator and are
quickly separated from the front. The larger is the magnetic
ﬁeld curvature, the faster particles are detrapped. Thus, for
wide dipolarizations preceded by negative depletions in Bz,
the upper limit of proton acceleration ahead of the fronts is
determined by the magnetic ﬁeld curvature. After protons
leave the equatorial plane, they can pass through the front on
the course of their gradient-bounce motion and either lose
or pick-up additional energy, which causes the spread of the
effective electric ﬁeld values in Figure 7b as well as the exis-
tence of large spread in ﬁnal energies of protons with close
initial gyrophase values in Figure 7a.
[36] Example trajectories of protons from both groups are
shown in Figure 8. Proton initial conditions are marked with
a purple dot. The proton which gets magnetized behind the
front E  B drifts earthward for about 2 RE lagging behind
the front until it gets scattered off the equator and resumes its
quasi-adiabatic westward motion. The proton trapped ahead
of the front is displaced by about 6 RE in the –y direction
being accelerated by almost 100 keV. After it is scattered off
the equator, its trajectory turns westward in the direction of
its gradient-curvature drift and passes behind the front where
the proton picks up additional energy due to its interaction
with the positive Ey ﬁeld behind the front.
[37] In the second simulation, protons were launched at
x0 = –12 RE where the ambient ﬁeld is larger than the mag-
nitude of the negative Bz depletion of the front, which was
started at x = –12.1 RE. Figure 9 shows one trajectory from
this simulation with the initial conditions same as in the
two-dimensional simulation of the quasi-trapping shown in
Figure 5b. Figure 9a shows a three-dimensional view of the
particle trajectory in the laboratory reference frame, while
Figure 9b shows the equatorial projection in the reference
frame moving with the front. Particle kinetic energy (in the
laboratory frame) is marked with color along the trajectories.
This example is in good agreement with the simpliﬁed two-
dimensional analysis of the previous section. During the ﬁrst
 8 s, the proton was quasi-trapped at the front. After the
encounter with the front, it was turned around by the strong
Bz behind the front. In about 3 s, the proton was ejected out
of the front being accelerated by  10 keV. Over the next
 4 s, it was accelerated by the electric ﬁeld ahead of the
front in the –y direction being simultaneously turned back
toward the front by the depleted magnetic ﬁeld. By the sec-
ond encounter with the front, the proton gained additional
 40 keV. At this point, it was overtaken by the front. Over
the following 20 s, the proton kept falling behind the front
losing its kinetic energy due to the diminishing inﬂuence of
the electric ﬁeld associated with the front motion. By the
time the proton was scattered off the equatorial plane its
energy dropped down to about 20 keV and it was separated
from the front by 1.5 RE at which point the inﬂuence of the
front electric ﬁeld was negligible and particle energy was
conserved through the end of the simulation. During most of
the interaction process, the proton was magnetized behind
the front due to its strong Bz, which kept it localized to the
equatorial plane. Therefore, despite the fact that the proton
was eventually scattered off the equator in accordance with
4959
 21699402, 2013, 8, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/jgra.50452 by Rice University, Wiley Online Library on [03/01/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


---

<!-- Page 9 -->

UKHORSKIY ET AL.: PROTON ACCELERATION AT DIPOLARIZATIONS
(a)
(b)
Figure 9.
An example of a quasi-trapped orbit from 3-D test-particle simulation of proton dynamics at
x0 = –12 RE where the front does not have a negative Bz depletion. (a) A 3-D view of particle trajectory
in the laboratory reference frame. (b) Orbit projection onto the equatorial plane in the reference frame
moving with the front. Particle kinetic energy (as calculated in the laboratory frame) along the trajectories
is marked with color.
the quasi-adiabatic motion of energetic particles in the tail,
it did not impact its interaction with the front.
[38] Figure 10 shows distributions of proton kinetic
energy versus their initial gyrophase in the simulation at
x0 = –12 RE computed at three different instances of the
simulation process. Figure 10a corresponds to t = 4 s when
particles that initially encounter the front are ejected to the
depleted magnetic ﬁeld region ahead of the front. Figure 10b
shows the distribution at t = 9 s when the particles that were
ejected out of the front encounter it for the second time.
Particle distribution at the end of the simulation is shown
in Figure 10c. It follows from the ﬁgure that the energiza-
tion is most efﬁcient for  0 2–3, which corresponds to the
particles that are accelerated both behind and ahead of the
front (i.e., encounter the front twice) similar to the example
shown in Figure 10. Particles that are ﬁrst energized ahead
of the front and then encounter it at an angle such that they
are overtaken by the front are considerably less energized.
In accordance with our two-dimensional analysis and the
example shown in Figure 10, particle energy is the highest
at the point when they encounter the front for the second
time. From the comparison of distributions in Figure 10a and
Figure 10b it follows that protons are energized by a fac-
tor of 2 more ahead of the front than behind the front. By
the end of the simulation (Figure 10c) particles lose more
than 50% of the energy acquired during quasi-trapping. As
opposed to the distribution from the previous simulation of
trapped particles shown in Figure 7a, there is no dispersion
in the energy gain for particles with similar initial gyrophase.
This is attributed to the fact that in the case of quasi-trapping,
equatorial particles are not scattered off the equator during
their interaction with the front. Particle trajectories leave
the equatorial plane only after they are disengaged from the
front and their energy is conserved.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 10.
The distribution of proton energy as function if their initial gyrophase computed at different
times of the 3-D test-particle simulation of proton dynamics at x0 = –12 RE where the front does not have
a negative Bz depletion.
4960
 21699402, 2013, 8, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/jgra.50452 by Rice University, Wiley Online Library on [03/01/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


---

<!-- Page 10 -->

UKHORSKIY ET AL.: PROTON ACCELERATION AT DIPOLARIZATIONS
6.
Conclusions
[39] This paper investigated acceleration of protons at the
encounter of earthward propagating dipolarization fronts.
We derived a general analytical solution for equatorially
mirroring particles interacting with a soliton-like front. Par-
ticle motion in the direction parallel to the front in this
case is described by a Hamiltonian function with a time-
dependent effective potential. From the analysis of the
potential function as well as simpliﬁed two-dimensional
simulations, it follows that there are two different regimes
of particle acceleration: trapping and quasi-trapping. Simi-
lar results were recently obtained by Takeuchi [2012] in the
context of particle acceleration at interstellar plasma shocks
and by Hoshino [2001] for magnetic solitary waves in
astrophysical plasma.
[40] In the case when the front is preceded by a nega-
tive depletion in Bz, particles can be stably trapped in the
vicinity of the reconnection point. Trapped particles are
accelerated in the –y direction by the electric ﬁeld produced
by the Lorentz transformation of the background magnetic
ﬁeld into the reference frame moving with the front as was
previously suggested by Artemyev et al. [2012].
[41] In the absence of a negative Bz depletion ahead of
the front, particles can be quasi-trapped. Particles encounter
and penetrate behind the front where they are accelerated
by the electric ﬁeld and turned around by strong magnetic
ﬁeld. Consequently, particles are ejected back into the region
of depleted magnetic ﬁeld where they are accelerated until
they encounter the front for the second time. Quasi-trapped
particles gain most of their energy ahead of the front.
[42] To understand how these acceleration regimes oper-
ate in a realistic magnetotail geometry, we conducted three-
dimensional test-particle simulations. The electromagnetic
ﬁeld of earthward moving fronts was described with a simple
analytical model, which reproduces their key observational
features. It was superimposed onto a constant ambient mag-
netic ﬁeld of the T96 models. Ensembles of equatorially
mirroring protons evenly distributed in the gyrophase were
initiated ahead of the front. We conducted two series of sim-
ulations representative of particle acceleration at the fronts
with and without a negative depletion in Bz. While the simu-
lations show that protons can be rapidly accelerated by up to
two orders of magnitude, understanding the global effect of
dipolarization fronts on ion energization in the tail requires
expanding our analysis onto the full pitch-angle and energy
spectra, which we defer to future studies.
[43] In the ﬁrst simulation, test particles were initialized
sufﬁciently far in the tail where the dipolarization front is
preceded by a negative depletion in Bz enabling stable trap-
ping ahead of the front. The level of particle energization, in
this case, depends on how long they can be trapped, i.e., stay
in phase with the earthward motion of the front. Trapping
time is limited by the width of the front and the curvature
of the ambient ﬁeld ahead of the front. The higher is the
curvature, the faster particles get scattered out of the equa-
torial plane. In our simulations with a front unbounded in
the dawn-dusk direction, trapped protons were accelerated
by up to  100 keV before being scattered off the equatorial
plane due to high magnetic ﬁeld curvature. In the realistic
conditions, the maximum energy of accelerated protons will
depend on the dawn-dusk extent of the front.
[44] Closer to Earth where the background magnetic ﬁeld
is high enough to prevent reconnection ahead of the front,
particles can be quasi-trapped. For the ﬁeld parameters
chosen in the simulations, protons were accelerated by >
40 keV. During most of their interaction with the front, par-
ticles stay magnetized behind the front which keeps them
localized in the equatorial plane. Consequently, the acceler-
ation is not limited by three-dimensional aspects of particle
orbits in the tail as in the case of trapping. However, it was
found that quasi-trapped particles cannot exhibit more than
two encounters with the front, which sets the upper limit for
particle acceleration. At the second encounter, protons are
overtaken by the front and lose more that 50% of their energy
gained during quasi-trapping.
[45] It has to be noted that in this paper the dipolariza-
tion fronts were treated as MHD structures neglecting kinetic
effects such as the differences in electron and ion motion,
which produce electrostatic ﬁeld across the fronts reported
from in situ spacecraft measurements [e.g., Fu et al., 2012].
As was shown in the analysis of shock surﬁng acceleration
[e.g., Hoshino, 2001; Shapiro and Ücer, 2003], such elec-
trostatic ﬁelds can enable stable trapping of ion ahead of
the fronts and enhance energization even in the absence of
negative depletion in Bz. It is therefore important to address
in subsequent publications what role the electrostatic ﬁelds
play in ion acceleration at dipolarization fronts. It also has
to be noted that dipolarization fronts are often accompa-
nied by the magnetic ﬁeld oscillations at frequencies close to
local gyrofrequency of energetic ions which can contribute
to local particle acceleration [e.g., Ono et al., 2009].
[46]
Acknowledgments.
The research was supported by NASA
contract NAS5-01072 through a subcontract from NJIT 999640 - I.
[47]
Masaki Fujimoto thanks Takanobu Amano and another reviewer
for their assistance in evaluating this paper.
References
Angelopoulos, V., W. Baumjohann, C. F. Kennel, F. V. Coroniti, M. G.
Kivelson, R. Pellat, R. J. Walker, H. Luhr, and G. Paschman (1992),
Bursty bulk ﬂows in the inner central plasma sheet, J. Geophys. Res.,
97, 4027.
Angelopoulos, V., et al. (1997), Magnetotail ﬂow bursts: Association to
global magnetospheric circulation, relationship to ionospheric activity
and direct evidence for localization, Geophys. Res. Lett., 24, 2271.
Artemyev, A. V., V. N. Lutsenko, and A. A. Petrukovich (2012), Ion
resonance acceleration by dipolarization fronts: Analytic theory and
spacecraft observation, Ann. Geophys., 30, 316, doi:10.5194/angeo-30-
317-2012.
Ashour-Abdalla, M., M. El-Alaoui, M. L. Goldstein, M. Zhou, D. Schriver,
R. Richard, R. Walker, M. G. Kivelson, and K.-J. Hwang (2010),
Observations and simulations of non-local acceleration of electrons in
magnetotail magnetic reconnection events, Nature Phys., 7, 360.
Baumjohann, W., G. Paschmann, and H. L˝uhr (1990), Characteristics of
high-speed ion ﬂows in the plasma sheet, J. Geophys. Res., 95, 3801.
Birn, J., and M. Hesse (1994), Particle acceleration in the dynamic magneto-
tail: Orbits in self-consistent three-dimensional MHD ﬁelds, J. Geophys.
Res., 99, 109.
Birn, J., M. F. Thomsen, J. E. Borovsky, G. D. R. D. J. McComas, R. D.
Belian, and M. Hesse (1997), Substorm ion injections: Geosynchronous
observations and test particle orbits in three-dimensional dynamic MHD
ﬁelds, J. Geophys. Res., 102, 2325.
Birn, J., M. F. Thomsen, J. E. Borovsky, and G. D. Reeves (2000),
Particle acceleration in the dynamic magnetotail, Physics of Plasmas, 7,
2149.
Birn, J., R. Nakamura, E. V. Panov, and M. Hesse (2011), Bursty bulk ﬂows
and dipolarization in MHD simulations of magnetotail reconnection,
J. Geophys. Res., 116, A01210, doi:10.1029/2010JA016083.
Birn, J., A. V. Artemyev, D. N. Baker, M. Echim, M. Hoshino, and L. M.
Zelenyi (2012), Particle acceleration in the magnetotail and aurora, Space
Sci. Rev., 173, 49–102, doi:10.1007/s11214-012-9874-4.
4961
 21699402, 2013, 8, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/jgra.50452 by Rice University, Wiley Online Library on [03/01/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


---

<!-- Page 11 -->

UKHORSKIY ET AL.: PROTON ACCELERATION AT DIPOLARIZATIONS
Brandt, P. C., D. G. Mitchell, E. C. Roelof, and J. L. Burch (2001), Bastille
Day storm: Global response of the terrestrial ring current, Solar Phys.,
204, 377.
Büchner, J., and L. M. Zelenyi (1989), Regular and chaotic charged parti-
cle motion in magnetotaillike ﬁeld reversals: I. Basic theory of trapped
motion, J. Geophys. Res., 94, 11,821.
Chen, C. X., and R. A. Wolf (1993), Interpretation of high-speed ﬂows in
the plasma sheet, J. Geophys. Res., 98, 21,409.
Chen, J. (1992), Nonlinear dynamics of charged particles in the magnetotail,
J. Geophys. Res., 97, 15,011.
Chen, J., and P. J. Palmadesso (1986), Chaos and nonlinear dynamics of
single-particle orbits in a magnetotaillike magnetic ﬁeld, J. Geophys.
Res., 91, 1499.
Delcourt, D. C., and J. A. Sauvaud (1994), Plasma sheet ion energization
during dipolarization events, J. Geophys. Res., 99, 97.
Elkington, S. R., D. N. Baker, and M. Wiltberger (2005), Injection of
energetic ions during the 31 March 0630 substorm, in The Inner
Magnetosphere: Physics and Modeling, edited by T. Pulkkinen et al.,
p. 656, American Geophysical Union, Washington, D. C.
Fairﬁeld, D. H., et al. (1998), Geotail observations of substorm onset in the
inner magnetotail, J. Geophys. Res., 103, 103.
Fairﬁeld, D. H., M. B. T. Mukai, G. D. Reeves, S. Kokubun, G. K. Parks, T.
Nagai, H. Matsumoto, K. Hashimoto, D. A. Gurnett, and T. Yamamoto
(1999), Earthward ﬂow bursts in the inner magnetotail and their relation
to auroral brightenings, AKR intensiﬁcations, geosynchronous particle
injections and magnetic activity, J. Geophys. Res., 104, 355.
Fu, H. S., Y. V. Khotyaintsev, A. Vaivads, M. André, and S. Y. Huang
(2012), Electric structure of dipolarization front at sub-proton scale,
Geophys. Res. Lett., 39, L06105, doi:10.1029/2012GL051274.
Gosling, J. T., M. F. Thomsen, S. J. Bame, W. C. Feldman, G. Paschmann,
and N. Sckopke (1982), Evidence for specularly reﬂected ions upstream
from the quasi-parallel bow shock, Geophys. Res. Lett., 9, 1333.
Harris, E. G. (1962), On a plasma sheath separating regions of oppositely
directed magnetic ﬁeld, Nuovo Cimento, 115, 23.
Hoshino, M. (2001), Nonthermal particle acceleration in shock front region:
“Shock surﬁng accelerations”, Prog. Theor. Phys. Suppl., 143, 149.
Katsouleas, T., and J. Dawson (1983), Unlimited electron acceleration in
laser-driven plasma waves, Phys. Rev. Lett., 51, 392.
Kennel, C. F., and H. E. Petscheck (1966), Limit on stably trapped particle
ﬂuxes, J. Geophys. Res., 71, 427.
Li, X., T. E. Sarris, D. N. Baker, and W. K. Peterson (2003),
Simulation of energetic particle injections associated with a substorm
on August 27, 2001, Geophys. Res. Lett., 30, 1004, doi:10.1029/
2002GL015967.
Lui, A. T. Y., R. W. McEntire, and S. M. Krimigis (1987), Evolution
of the ring current during two geomagnetic storms, J. Geophys. Res., 92,
7459.
McPherron, R. L., C. T. Russell, and M. P. Aubry (1973), Satellite studies
of magnetospheric substorms on August 15, 1968: 9. Phenomenological
model for substorms., J. Geophys. Res., 78, 3131.
Nakamura, R., et al. (2002), Motion of the dipolarization front during a
ﬂow burst event observed by Cluster, Geophys. Res. Lett., 29, 1942,
doi:10.1029/2002GL015763.
Nakamura, R., et al. (2004), Spatial scale of high-speed ﬂows in the
plasma sheet observed by Cluster, Geophys. Res. Lett., 31, L09804,
doi:10.1029/2004GL019558.
Nosé, M., H. Koshiishi, H. Matsumoto, P. C. Brandt, K. K. K. Koga, T.
Goka, and T. Obara (2010), Magnetic ﬁeld dipolarization in the deep
inner magnetosphere and its role in development of O+-rich ring current,
J. Geophys. Res., 115, A00J03, doi:10.1029/2010JA015321.
Ohtani, S., M. A. Shay, and T. Mukai (2004), Temporal structure of
the fast convective ﬂow in the plasma sheet: Comparison between
observations and two-ﬂuid simulations, J. Geophys. Res., 109, A03210,
doi:10.1029/2003JA010002.
Ohtani, S., H. J. Singer, and T. Mukai (2006), Effects of the fast
plasma sheet ﬂow on the geosynchronous magnetic conﬁguration:
Geotail and GOES coordinated study, J. Geophys. Res., 111, A01204,
doi:10.1029/2005JA011383.
Ono, Y., M. Nóse, S. P. Christon, and A. T. Y. Lui (2009), The role
of magnetic ﬁeld ﬂuctuations in nonadiabatic acceleration of ions
during dipolarization, J. Geophys. Res., 114, A05209, doi:10.1029/
2008JA013918.
Pontius, D. H., and R. A. Wolf (1990), Transient ﬂux tubes in the terrestrial
magnetosphere, Geophys. Res. Lett., 17, 49.
Pritchett, P. L., F. V. Coroniti, R. Pellat, and H. Karimabadi (1991),
Collisionless reconnection in two-dimensional magnetotail equilibria,
J. Geophys. Res., 96, 11,523.
Roelof, E. C., P. C. Brandt, and D. G. Mitchell (2004), Derivation of cur-
rents and diamagnetic effects from global plasma pressure distributions
obtained by IMAGE/HENA, Adv. Space. Res., 33, 747.
Rosenbluth, M. N., and C. L. Longmire (1957), Stability of plasmas
conﬁned by magnetic ﬁelds, Ann. Phys., 25, 3701.
Runov, A., et al. (2005), Electric current and magnetic ﬁeld geometry in
ﬂapping magnetotail current sheets, Ann. Geophys., 23, 1391.
Runov, A., V. Angelopoulos, M. I. Sitnov, V. A. Sergeev, J. Bonnell, J. P.
McFadden, D. Larson, K. H. Glassmeier, and U. Auster (2009), THEMIS
observations of an earthward-propagating dipolarization front, Geophys.
Res. Lett., 36, L14106, doi:10.1029/2009GL038980.
Runov, A., V. Angelopoulos, X.-Z. Zhou, X. J. Zhang, S. Li, F. Plaschke,
and J. Bonnell (2011), A THEMIS multicase study of dipolarization
fronts in the magnetotail plasma sheet, J. Geophys. Res., 116, A05216,
doi:10.1029/2010JA016316.
Runov, A., V. Angelopoulos, and X.-Z. Zhou (2012), Multipoint obser-
vations of dipolarization front formation by magnetotail reconnection,
J. Geophys. Res., 117, A05230, doi:10.1029/2011JA017361.
Sagdeev, R. Z. (1966), Cooperative Phenomena and Shock Waves in
Collisionless Plasma, p. 23, Consultants Bureau, New York.
Sarris, T., X. Li, N. Tsaggas, and N. Paschalidis (2002), Modeling ener-
getic particle injections in dynamic pulse ﬁelds with varying propagation
speeds, J. Geophys. Res., 107, 1033, doi:10.1029/2001JA900166.
Shapiro, V. D., and D. Ücer (2003), Shock surﬁng acceleration, Planet.
Space Sci., 51, 665.
Shiokawa, K., W. Baumjohann, and G. Haerendel (1997), Braking of high-
speed ﬂows in the near-Earth tail, Geophys. Res. Lett., 24, 1179.
Shiokawa, K., et al. (1998), High-speed ion ﬂow, substorm current wedge,
and multiple Pi 2 pulsations, J. Geophys. Res., 103, 4491.
Sitnov, M. I., and M. Swisdak (2011), Onset of collisionless mag-
netic reconnection in two-dimensional current sheets and formation
of dipolarization fronts, J. Geophys. Res., 116, A12216, doi:10.1029/
2011JA016920.
Sitnov, M. I., N. Buzulukova, M. Swisdak, V. G. Merkin, and T. E.
Moore (2013), Spontaneous formation of dipolarization fronts and
reconnection onset in the magnetotail, Geophys. Res. Lett., 40, 22,
doi:10.1029/2012GL054701.
Takeuchi, S. (2005), New particle accelerations by magnetized plasma
shock waves, Phys. Plasmas, 12, 102,901.
Takeuchi, S. (2012), Field-aligned accelerations by plasma shocks
propagating through interstellar magnetic ﬁelds, Phys. Plasmas, 19,
070,703.
Terasawa, T. (1979), Energy spectrum and pitch angle distribution of
particles reﬂected by MHD shock waves of fast mode, Planet. Space Sci.,
27, 193.
Thorne, R. M. (2010), Radiation belt dynamics: The importance of wave-
particle interactions, Geophys. Res. Lett., 37, L22107, doi:10.1029/
2010GL044990.
Tsyganenko, N. A. (1995), Modeling the Earth’s magnetospheric magnetic
ﬁeld conﬁned within a realistic magnetopause, J. Geophys. Res., 100,
5599.
Tsyganenko, N. A. (2002), A model of the near magnetosphere with a
dawn-dusk asymmetry 2. Parameterization and ﬁtting to observations,
J. Geophys. Res., 107, 1176, doi:10.1029/2001JA000220.
Ukhorskiy, A. Y., B. J. Anderson, P. C. Brandt, and N. A. Tsyganenko
(2006), Storm-time evolution of the outer radiation belt: Transport and
losses, J. Geophys. Res., 111, A11S03, doi:10.1029/2006JA011690.
Zaharia, S., J. Birn, R. H. W. Friedel, G. D. Reeves, M. F. Thomsen,
and C. Z. Cheng (2004), Substorm injection modeling with nondipo-
lar, time-dependent background ﬁeld, J. Geophys. Res., 109, A10211,
doi:10.1029/2004JA010464.
Zhou, M., M. Ashour-Abdalla, X. Deng, M. El-Alaoui, R. L. Richard,
and R. J. Walker (2011a), Modeling substorm ion injection observed
by the THEMIS and LANL spacecraft in the near-Earth magnetotail,
J. Geophys. Res., 116, A08222, doi:10.1029/2010JA016391.
Zhou, X.-Z., V. Angelopoulos, V. A. Sergeev, and A. Runov (2010),
Accelerated ions ahead of earthward propagating dipolarization fronts,
J. Geophys. Res., 115, A00I03, doi:10.1029/2010JA015481.
Zhou, X.-Z., V. Angelopoulos, V. A. Sergeev, and A. Runov (2011b), On
the nature of precursor ﬂows upstream of advancing dipolarization fronts,
J. Geophys. Res., 116, A03222, doi:10.1029/2010JA016165.
4962
 21699402, 2013, 8, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/jgra.50452 by Rice University, Wiley Online Library on [03/01/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
